content/articles/computing/index.md, before:

---
title: "Scientific computing and data handling workflows"
date: 2018-03-21
csl: ../inbo.csl
bibliography: ../reproducible_research.bib
categories: ["literature"]
tags: ["literature", "open science"]
output: 
    md_document:
        preserve_yaml: true
weight: 2
---

This page lists **selected** literature and online resources. Some are
related to existing tutorial pages, while others are not. They are
supposed to be of high interest to this site's users.

Several of the resources were added based on an inspiring
[talk](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/10KkXEv4r3wWtdKvB6RFOPe809eMNldODaRqQxn-jeME/edit?usp=sharing)
by Julia Lowndes at the SAFRED conference, Brussels, 27 Feb 2018.

Overviews
---------

-   Wilson *et al.* (2017): set of **good computing practices** that
    every researcher can adopt
-   British Ecological Society (2014): planning the **data life cycle**;
    creating, processing, documenting, preserving, sharing & reusing
    data
-   Cooper & Hsing (2017): file organisation, workflow documentation,
    **code** reproducibility and readability, writing reproducible
    reports, version control and code archiving
-   Ibanez *et al.* (2014): vision on reproducible science, routine
    **practices**, collaboration, literate computing

See also some resources related to [learning and education](../skills)
and the [discipline of open and reproducible science](../open_science).

Specific tools
--------------

-   Ross *et al.* (2017): about **tidyverse** workflow and tools

Focus on version control workflows
----------------------------------

-   Bryan (2017): rationale, workflows and tools regarding version
    control for project organization

Bibliography
------------

British Ecological Society (Ed.) (2014). A guide to data management in
ecology and evolution. BES Guides to Better Science. British Ecological
Society, London.

Bryan J. (2017). Excuse me, do you have a moment to talk about version
control? PeerJ Preprints 5: e3159v2. URL:
<https://peerj.com/preprints/3159>. DOI:
[10.7287/peerj.preprints.3159v2](https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.3159v2).

Cooper N. & Hsing P.-Y. (Eds.) (2017). A guide to reproducible code in
ecology and evolution. BES Guides to Better Science. British Ecological
Society, London.

Ibanez L., Schroeder W.J. & Hanwell M.D. (2014). Practicing open
science. In: Stodden V., Leisch F., Peng R.D. (editors). Implementing
reproducible research. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Ross Z., Wickham H. & Robinson D. (2017). Declutter your R workflow with
tidy tools. PeerJ Preprints 5: e3180v1. URL:
<https://peerj.com/preprints/3180>. DOI:
[10.7287/peerj.preprints.3180v1](https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.3180v1).

Wilson G., Bryan J., Cranston K., Kitzes J., Nederbragt L. & Teal T.K.
(2017). Good enough practices in scientific computing. PLOS
Computational Biology 13 (6): e1005510. URL:
<http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510>.
DOI:
[10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510).

Commit message:

Article computing workflows: add gitbook Bryan et al

content/articles/computing/index.md, after:

---
title: "Scientific computing and data handling workflows"
date: 2018-03-21
csl: ../inbo.csl
bibliography: ../reproducible_research.bib
categories: ["literature"]
tags: ["literature", "open science"]
output: 
    md_document:
        preserve_yaml: true
weight: 2
---

This page lists **selected** literature and online resources. Some are
related to existing tutorial pages, while others are not. They are
supposed to be of high interest to this site's users.

Several of the resources were added based on an inspiring
[talk](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/10KkXEv4r3wWtdKvB6RFOPe809eMNldODaRqQxn-jeME/edit?usp=sharing)
by Julia Lowndes at the SAFRED conference, Brussels, 27 Feb 2018.

Overviews
---------

-   Wilson *et al.* (2017): set of **good computing practices** that
    every researcher can adopt
-   British Ecological Society (2014): planning the **data life cycle**;
    creating, processing, documenting, preserving, sharing & reusing
    data
-   Cooper & Hsing (2017): file organisation, workflow documentation,
    **code** reproducibility and readability, writing reproducible
    reports, version control and code archiving
-   Ibanez *et al.* (2014): vision on reproducible science, routine
    **practices**, collaboration, literate computing

See also some resources related to [learning and education](../skills)
and the [discipline of open and reproducible science](../open_science).

Specific tools
--------------

-   Ross *et al.* (2017): about **tidyverse** workflow and tools

Focus on version control workflows
----------------------------------

-   Bryan (2017): rationale, workflows and tools regarding version
    control for project organization
-   Bryan *et al.* (2019): getting started with git and github workflows
    in RStudio

Bibliography
------------

British Ecological Society (Ed.) (2014). A guide to data management in
ecology and evolution. BES Guides to Better Science. British Ecological
Society, London.

Bryan J. (2017). Excuse me, do you have a moment to talk about version
control? PeerJ Preprints 5: e3159v2. URL:
<https://peerj.com/preprints/3159>. DOI:
[10.7287/peerj.preprints.3159v2](https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.3159v2).

Bryan J., the STAT 545 TAs & Hester J. (2019). Happy Git and GitHub for
the useR. URL: <https://happygitwithr.com/>.

Cooper N. & Hsing P.-Y. (Eds.) (2017). A guide to reproducible code in
ecology and evolution. BES Guides to Better Science. British Ecological
Society, London.

Ibanez L., Schroeder W.J. & Hanwell M.D. (2014). Practicing open
science. In: Stodden V., Leisch F., Peng R.D. (editors). Implementing
reproducible research. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.

Ross Z., Wickham H. & Robinson D. (2017). Declutter your R workflow with
tidy tools. PeerJ Preprints 5: e3180v1. URL:
<https://peerj.com/preprints/3180>. DOI:
[10.7287/peerj.preprints.3180v1](https://doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.3180v1).

Wilson G., Bryan J., Cranston K., Kitzes J., Nederbragt L. & Teal T.K.
(2017). Good enough practices in scientific computing. PLOS
Computational Biology 13 (6): e1005510. URL:
<http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510>.
DOI:
[10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005510).
