content/_index.md, before:

---
title: Home
menu: sidebar
weight: -100
---

## Introduction

Welcome to the tutorials website of the [Research Institute for Nature and Forest (INBO)](https://www.inbo.be/en). It contains a collection of guides, tutorials and further reading material on the installation, use and development of **(research) software** at our institute.

## Getting started

When this is your first time checking this website, welcome! You are always free to look around a bit, but if you are looking for something specific, the website provides 3 options to search for relevant topics:

- [Categories]({{< relref "/categories/_index.md" >}}): A (limited) set of general categories to classify the tutorials. For example, `installation` for support during installation of software or `r` for tutorials about the R programming language. Click on a category to get the relevant tutorials.
- Tags: Check the cloud of tags listed on each page of the website and pick an item that would be relevant for your topic. By clicking on a specific tag, you will get an overview of the tutorials with this tag
- Search: Type any word in the search form and you will get a dropdown list of the pages which contain the word you are looking for.

## Website menu

Apart from the navigation options explained in the previous section, pages are divided into 3 main section accessible with the menu:

- [Tutorials]({{< relref "/tutorials/_index.md" >}}): The main bulk of pages, providing tutorials on a variety of topics.
- [Articles]({{< relref "/articles/_index.md" >}}): Provides useful background information about topics, links to literature, etc.
- [Installation]({{< relref "/installation/_index.md" >}}): Installation instructions for both system administrators and users

The absence of a more granular menu is a deliberate decision to overcome the requirement to recreate a website menu when new tutorials are written. By using categories and tags, more flexibility is provided. The tags list, categories overview and search options are automatically updated when a new tutorial is added to the website.

## Want to contribute?

Great news! By sharing information, we can effectively help each other. Moreover, a tutorial is useful for your future self as well ;-). Anything that could be useful to your colleagues? Instead of keeping a note or document on your own computer or drive, make it a tutorial and share it. Notice that also links/references to other resources are useful to add, as this will enable others to find these reources.

Check the [_create tutorial_]({{< relref "/create_tutorial/index.md" >}}) page for more information on how to contribute to this website!

## Questions?

If you have any questions, do not hesitate to contact the website maintainers (main contributors listed [here](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/graphs/contributors)), provide a [new issue](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/issues/new) if you already have a Github account or just ask the [IT helpdesk](mailto:ict.helpdesk@inbo.be) for more information.

Commit message:

Update homepage: link to Readme for more background

content/_index.md, after:

---
title: Home
menu: sidebar
weight: -100
---

## Introduction

Welcome to the tutorials website of the [Research Institute for Nature and Forest (INBO)](https://www.inbo.be/en). It contains a collection of guides, tutorials and further reading material on the installation, use and development of **(research) software** at our institute.

## Getting started

When this is your first time checking this website, welcome! You are always free to look around a bit, but if you are looking for something specific, the website provides 3 options to search for relevant topics:

- [Categories]({{< relref "/categories/_index.md" >}}): A (limited) set of general categories to classify the tutorials. For example, `installation` for support during installation of software or `r` for tutorials about the R programming language. Click on a category to get the relevant tutorials.
- Tags: Check the cloud of tags listed on each page of the website and pick an item that would be relevant for your topic. By clicking on a specific tag, you will get an overview of the tutorials with this tag
- Search: Type any word in the search form and you will get a dropdown list of the pages which contain the word you are looking for.

## Website menu

Apart from the navigation options explained in the previous section, pages are divided into 3 main section accessible with the menu:

- [Tutorials]({{< relref "/tutorials/_index.md" >}}): The main bulk of pages, providing tutorials on a variety of topics.
- [Articles]({{< relref "/articles/_index.md" >}}): Provides useful background information about topics, links to literature, etc.
- [Installation]({{< relref "/installation/_index.md" >}}): Installation instructions for both system administrators and users

The absence of a more granular menu is a deliberate decision to overcome the requirement to recreate a website menu when new tutorials are written. By using categories and tags, more flexibility is provided. The tags list, categories overview and search options are automatically updated when a new tutorial is added to the website.

## Want to contribute?

Great news! By sharing information, we can effectively help each other. Moreover, a tutorial is useful for your future self as well ;-). Anything that could be useful to your colleagues? Instead of keeping a note or document on your own computer or drive, make it a tutorial and share it. Notice that also links/references to other resources are useful to add, as this will enable others to find these reources.

Check the [_create tutorial_]({{< relref "/create_tutorial/index.md" >}}) page for more information on how to contribute to this website!

Further background can be found in the [Readme](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/blob/master/README.md) of the code repository.

## Questions?

If you have any questions, do not hesitate to contact the website maintainers (main contributors listed [here](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/graphs/contributors)), provide a [new issue](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/issues/new) if you already have a Github account or just ask the [IT helpdesk](mailto:ict.helpdesk@inbo.be) for more information.
