content/tutorials/r_brms/index.md, before:

---
title: "Tutorial Bayesian statistics with brms"
description: "This tutorial starts with a theoretical overview of bayesian statistics and the MCMC algorithm. Next, we fit, check, and analyse Bayesian models with the brms package."
author: [raisacarmen, wardlangeraert, toonvandaele]
date: 2024-01-02
categories: ["r", "statistics"]
tags: ["generalized linear regression", "brms", "r", "mixed models"]
---

In the fall of 2023, a tutorial on Bayesian statistics with the [**brms**](https://paul-buerkner.github.io/brms/) packages was organised at INBO.
Before you start the tutorial, please follow the instructions in [this R script](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/blob/master/content/tutorials/r_brms/brms_eng/install_packages.R) to install brms properly.
All course material can be found in Dutch and English on the following pages:

- The [English tutorial](../../html/workshop_1_mcmc_en_brms_eng.html) with all [course material](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/tree/master/content/tutorials/r_brms/brms_eng) to test the examples yourself.
- The [Dutch tutorial](../../html/workshop_1_mcmc_en_brms.html) with all [course material](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/tree/master/content/tutorials/r_brms/brms_nl) to test the examples yourself.

Commit message:

brms_rstan: windows testing, index, author

content/tutorials/r_brms/index.md, after:

---
title: "Tutorial Bayesian statistics with brms"
description: "This tutorial starts with a theoretical overview of bayesian statistics and the MCMC algorithm. Next, we fit, check, and analyse Bayesian models with the brms package."
author: [raisacarmen, wardlangeraert, toonvandaele, falkmielke]
date: 2024-01-02
categories: ["r", "statistics"]
tags: ["generalized linear regression", "brms", "r", "mixed models", "stan"]
---

In the fall of 2023, a tutorial on Bayesian statistics with the [**brms**](https://paul-buerkner.github.io/brms/) packages was organised at INBO.
Before you start the tutorial, please follow the instructions in [this R script](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/blob/master/content/tutorials/r_brms/brms_eng/install_packages.R) to install brms properly.
For more advanced use cases, we added an example of how to directly use [**stan**](https://mc-stan.org) via the `rstan` package.
All course material can be found in Dutch and English on the following pages:

- The [English tutorial](../../html/workshop_1_mcmc_en_brms_eng.html) with all [course material](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/tree/master/content/tutorials/r_brms/brms_eng) to test the examples yourself.
- The [Dutch tutorial](../../html/workshop_1_mcmc_en_brms.html) with all [course material](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/tree/master/content/tutorials/r_brms/brms_nl) to test the examples yourself.
