content/tutorials/spatial_standards_vector/index.md, before:

---
title: "How to use open vector file formats in R: GeoPackage & GeoJSON"
description: "A simple tutorial to demonstrate the use of *.gpkg and *.geojson files in R"
author: "Floris Vanderhaeghe"
date: 2019-11-19
categories: ["r", "gis"]
tags: ["gis", "r"]
output: 
    md_document:
        preserve_yaml: true
        variant: gfm
---

This tutorial uses a few basic functions from the
[dplyr](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org) and
[sf](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/) packages. While only a few
functions are used, you can use the previous hyperlinks to access the
tutorials (vignettes) of these packages for more functions and
information.

``` r
options(stringsAsFactors = FALSE)
library(tidyverse)
library(sf)
library(inborutils)
```

You find a bit more background about ‘why and what’, regarding the below
open standards, in [a separate
post](../../articles/geospatial_standards/) on this website.

## How to make and use GeoPackages (`*.gpkg`)

### Making a GeoPackage from a geospatial `sf` object in R

As an example, we download a geospatial layer of Special Areas of
Conservation in Flanders (version *sac\_2013-01-18*) from Zenodo:

``` r
# meeting a great function from the 'inborutils' package:
download_zenodo(doi = "10.5281/zenodo.3386815")
```

    ## [1] "md5sum 1fc2a8b5f56ad4ba05a999697e31626e for sac.dbf is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum e8c2db3e5567fbf7ef9c0f306fde20f2 for sac.prj is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum 945791898114a317581c5560d025e420 for sac.sbn is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum 7d75b87ca3aad3ae275ff447a1b2d75c for sac.sbx is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum ce6f5cbb37f35884f28053a4be765408 for sac.shp is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum 91094173055ff88e77355930464853a9 for sac.shx is correct."

*Did you know this: you can visit a website of this dataset by just
prefixing the DOI string \[1\] by `doi.org/`\!*

The data source is a shapefile, in this case consisting of 6 different
files. Read the geospatial data into R as an `sf` object, and let’s just
keep the essentials (though it doesn’t matter for the GeoPackage):

``` r
sac <- 
  read_sf("sac.shp") %>% 
  select(sac_code = GEBCODE,
         sac_name = NAAM,
         subsac_code = DEELGEBIED,
         polygon_id = POLY_ID)
```

Have a look at its contents by printing the object:

``` r
sac
```

    ## Simple feature collection with 616 features and 4 fields
    ## geometry type:  POLYGON
    ## dimension:      XY
    ## bbox:           xmin: 22084.25 ymin: 153207.4 xmax: 258865 ymax: 243333
    ## epsg (SRID):    NA
    ## proj4string:    +proj=lcc +lat_1=49.8333339 +lat_2=51.16666723333333 +lat_0=90 +lon_0=4.367486666666666 +x_0=150000.01256 +y_0=5400088.4378 +ellps=intl +units=m +no_defs
    ## # A tibble: 616 x 5
    ##    sac_code sac_name subsac_code polygon_id
    ##    <chr>    <chr>    <chr>            <int>
    ##  1 BE21000… Heesbos… BE2100020-4          1
    ##  2 BE21000… Heesbos… BE2100020-2          2
    ##  3 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-…          3
    ##  4 BE21000… Kalmtho… BE2100015-1          4
    ##  5 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-…          5
    ##  6 BE21000… Heesbos… BE2100020-6          6
    ##  7 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-…          7
    ##  8 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-…          8
    ##  9 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-5          9
    ## 10 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-2         10
    ## # … with 606 more rows, and 1 more variable:
    ## #   geometry <POLYGON [m]>

To write the GeoPackage, we just use the GPKG driver of the powerful
[GDAL](https://gdal.org) library (supporting most open and some closed
formats), which can be elegantly accessed through `sf::st_write()`:

``` r
sac %>% 
  st_write("sac.gpkg")
```

    ## Updating layer `sac' to data source `sac.gpkg' using driver `GPKG'
    ## Writing 616 features with 4 fields and geometry type Polygon.

Is that all?  
***YES :-)***

Really?  
***YES :-)***

Well, hmmm, if you really want to know a little bit more…

A GeoPackage can contain many layers. So, it is good practice to
explicitly define the layer name within the GeoPackage (above, it was
automatically called ‘sac’). For example:

``` r
sac %>% 
  st_write("sac.gpkg",
           layer = "special_areas_conservation",
           delete_dsn = TRUE)
```

    ## Deleting source `sac.gpkg' using driver `GPKG'
    ## Updating layer `special_areas_conservation' to data source `sac.gpkg' using driver `GPKG'
    ## Writing 616 features with 4 fields and geometry type Polygon.

Note, `delete_dsn` was set as `TRUE` to replace the whole GeoPackage.
(There is also a `delete_layer` parameter to overwrite an existing
*layer* with the same name.)

### Reading a GeoPackage file

Can it become more simple than
    this?

``` r
sac_test <- st_read("sac.gpkg")
```

    ## Reading layer `special_areas_conservation' from data source `/media/floris/DATA/git_repositories/tutorials/content/tutorials/spatial_standards_vector/sac.gpkg' using driver `GPKG'
    ## Simple feature collection with 616 features and 4 fields
    ## geometry type:  POLYGON
    ## dimension:      XY
    ## bbox:           xmin: 22084.25 ymin: 153207.4 xmax: 258865 ymax: 243333
    ## epsg (SRID):    NA
    ## proj4string:    +proj=lcc +lat_1=49.8333339 +lat_2=51.16666723333333 +lat_0=90 +lon_0=4.367486666666666 +x_0=150000.01256 +y_0=5400088.4378 +ellps=intl +units=m +no_defs

Ready you are\!

Also other geospatial software will (or should be) able to open the
GeoPackage format. It is an open standard, after all\!

## How to make and use GeoJSON files (`*.geojson`)

### Making a GeoJSON file from a geospatial `sf` object in R

As another example, let’s download a shapefile of stream habitat 3260 in
Flanders (version
    *2018*):

``` r
download_zenodo(doi = "10.5281/zenodo.3386246")
```

    ## [1] "md5sum bd4b0efd270348de0f00bb02980d1d48 for habitatstreams.dbf is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum f881f61a6c07741b58cb618d8bbb0b99 for habitatstreams.prj is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum f8559b033303c7b110df2136d0ec24ee for habitatstreams.shp is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum 1b9c3f98f63339ea374d10c75399657e for habitatstreams.shx is correct."

The data source is a shapefile again, in this case consisting of 4
different files. Similar as above, we read the geospatial data into R as
an `sf` object and select a few attributes to work with:

``` r
habitatstreams <- 
  read_sf("habitatstreams.shp") %>% 
  select(river_name = NAAM,
         source = BRON)
```

``` r
habitatstreams
```

    ## Simple feature collection with 560 features and 2 fields
    ## geometry type:  LINESTRING
    ## dimension:      XY
    ## bbox:           xmin: 33097.92 ymin: 157529.6 xmax: 254039 ymax: 243444.6
    ## epsg (SRID):    NA
    ## proj4string:    +proj=lcc +lat_1=49.8333339 +lat_2=51.16666723333333 +lat_0=90 +lon_0=4.367486666666666 +x_0=150000.01256 +y_0=5400088.4378 +ellps=intl +units=m +no_defs
    ## # A tibble: 560 x 3
    ##    river_name source
    ##    <chr>      <chr> 
    ##  1 WOLFPUTBE… VMM   
    ##  2 OUDE KALE  VMM   
    ##  3 VENLOOP    EcoInv
    ##  4 VENLOOP    EcoInv
    ##  5 KLEINE NE… EcoInv
    ##  6 KLEINE NE… EcoInv
    ##  7 KLEINE NE… EcoInv
    ##  8 KLEINE NE… EcoInv
    ##  9 RAAMDONKS… extra…
    ## 10 KLEINE NE… EcoInv
    ## # … with 550 more rows, and 1 more variable:
    ## #   geometry <LINESTRING [m]>

Nowadays, it is recommended to use the more recent and strict
**RFC7946** implementation of GeoJSON. The previous ‘GeoJSON 2008’
implementation is now obsoleted (see [the
post](../../articles/geospatial_standards/) on this tutorials website
for a bit more background).

The RFC7946 standard is well supported by GDAL’s GeoJSON driver, however
GDAL must be given the explicit option `RFC7946=YES` in order to use it
already \[2\].

Write the GeoJSON file as follows:

``` r
habitatstreams %>% 
  st_write("habitatstreams.geojson",
           layer_options = "RFC7946=YES")
```

    ## Writing layer `habitatstreams' to data source `habitatstreams.geojson' using driver `GeoJSON'
    ## options:        RFC7946=YES 
    ## Writing 560 features with 2 fields and geometry type Line String.

Done creating\!

### Do I look good?

Hey wait, wasn’t a GeoJSON file just a text file?  
***Indeed.***

So I can just open it as a text file to get an idea of its contents?  
***Well seen :-)***

Hence, also use it in versioned workflows?  
***Didn’t hear that. (Cool, though…)***

Let’s just look at the top 7 lines of the file:

    {
    "type": "FeatureCollection",
    "name": "habitatstreams",
    "features": [
    { "type": "Feature", "properties": { "river_name": "WOLFPUTBEEK", "source": "VMM" }, "geometry": { "type": "LineString", "coordinates": [ [ 4.0532635, 50.8196905 ], [ 4.0532327, 50.8197202 ], [ 4.0530778, 50.8197594 ], [ 4.0528708, 50.8199422 ], [ 4.052834, 50.8201498 ], [ 4.0528767, 50.8204559 ] ] } },
    { "type": "Feature", "properties": { "river_name": "OUDE KALE", "source": "VMM" }, "geometry": { "type": "LineString", "coordinates": [ [ 3.5931564, 51.0803318 ], [ 3.5930966, 51.0803266 ], [ 3.5927771, 51.0802782 ], [ 3.5926209, 51.080259 ], [ 3.5925707, 51.0802465 ], [ 3.5925106, 51.0802316 ], [ 3.592303, 51.0801396 ], [ 3.5921047, 51.0800302 ], [ 3.5920091, 51.0799694 ], [ 3.5919755, 51.0799432 ], [ 3.5919328, 51.07991 ], [ 3.5919165, 51.0798833 ] ] } },
    { "type": "Feature", "properties": { "river_name": "VENLOOP", "source": "EcoInv" }, "geometry": { "type": "LineString", "coordinates": [ [ 4.6443172, 51.1940245 ], [ 4.644403, 51.1938051 ], [ 4.6439364, 51.1937415 ], [ 4.6438717, 51.1936806 ], [ 4.6439146, 51.1934056 ] ] } },

You can see it basically lists the feature attributes and the
coordinates of the lines’ vertices, with each feature starting on a new
line.

Compare the coordinates with those of the `sf` object `habitatstreams`
above: the data have been reprojected on the fly to WGS84\!

Note: in order to be still manageable (text file size, usage in
versioning systems) it seems wise to use GeoJSON for more simple cases –
**points and rather simple lines and polygons** – and use the binary
GeoPackage format for larger (more complex) cases.

### Reading a GeoJSON file

Just do
    this:

``` r
habitatstreams_test <- st_read("habitatstreams.geojson")
```

    ## Reading layer `habitatstreams' from data source `/media/floris/DATA/git_repositories/tutorials/content/tutorials/spatial_standards_vector/habitatstreams.geojson' using driver `GeoJSON'
    ## Simple feature collection with 560 features and 2 fields
    ## geometry type:  LINESTRING
    ## dimension:      XY
    ## bbox:           xmin: 2.69742 ymin: 50.72875 xmax: 5.85425 ymax: 51.50032
    ## epsg (SRID):    4326
    ## proj4string:    +proj=longlat +datum=WGS84 +no_defs

Same story as for the GeoPackage: other geospatial software will (or
should be) able to open the GeoJSON format as well, as it’s an open and
well established standard.

From the message of `st_read()` you can see the CRS is WGS84
([EPSG-code 4326](https://epsg.io/4326)) - this is always expected when
reading a GeoJSON file.

If you want to transform the data to another CRS, e.g. Belgian Lambert
72 ([EPSG-code 31370](https://epsg.io/31370)), use `sf::st_transform()`:

``` r
habitatstreams_test %>% 
  st_transform(31370)
```

    ## Simple feature collection with 560 features and 2 fields
    ## geometry type:  LINESTRING
    ## dimension:      XY
    ## bbox:           xmin: 33013.71 ymin: 157590.5 xmax: 253945.9 ymax: 243502.9
    ## epsg (SRID):    31370
    ## proj4string:    +proj=lcc +lat_1=51.16666723333333 +lat_2=49.8333339 +lat_0=90 +lon_0=4.367486666666666 +x_0=150000.013 +y_0=5400088.438 +ellps=intl +towgs84=-106.8686,52.2978,-103.7239,0.3366,-0.457,1.8422,-1.2747 +units=m +no_defs
    ## First 10 features:
    ##        river_name   source
    ## 1     WOLFPUTBEEK      VMM
    ## 2       OUDE KALE      VMM
    ## 3         VENLOOP   EcoInv
    ## 4         VENLOOP   EcoInv
    ## 5     KLEINE NETE   EcoInv
    ## 6     KLEINE NETE   EcoInv
    ## 7     KLEINE NETE   EcoInv
    ## 8     KLEINE NETE   EcoInv
    ## 9  RAAMDONKSEBEEK extrapol
    ## 10    KLEINE NETE   EcoInv
    ##                          geometry
    ## 1  LINESTRING (127768.8 167742...
    ## 2  LINESTRING (95650.24 196973...
    ## 3  LINESTRING (169263.1 209374...
    ## 4  LINESTRING (169544 209352.8...
    ## 5  LINESTRING (180997 208666.5...
    ## 6  LINESTRING (179947.3 208419...
    ## 7  LINESTRING (180429.9 208655...
    ## 8  LINESTRING (187289.6 210058...
    ## 9  LINESTRING (183455.2 192468...
    ## 10 LINESTRING (183426.2 208321...

1.  DOI = Digital Object Identifier. See <https://www.doi.org>.

2.   Though GeoJSON 2008 is
    [obsoleted](http://geojson.org/geojson-spec.html), the now
    recommended [RFC7946](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7946) standard
    is still officially in a *proposal* stage. That is probably the
    reason why GDAL does not yet default to RFC7946. A somehow confusing
    stage, it seems.

Commit message:

Open geospatial standards: add small note

content/tutorials/spatial_standards_vector/index.md, after:

---
title: "How to use open vector file formats in R: GeoPackage & GeoJSON"
description: "A simple tutorial to demonstrate the use of *.gpkg and *.geojson files in R"
author: "Floris Vanderhaeghe"
date: 2019-11-19
categories: ["r", "gis"]
tags: ["gis", "r"]
output: 
    md_document:
        preserve_yaml: true
        variant: gfm
---

This tutorial uses a few basic functions from the
[dplyr](https://dplyr.tidyverse.org) and
[sf](https://r-spatial.github.io/sf/) packages. While only a few
functions are used, you can use the previous hyperlinks to access the
tutorials (vignettes) of these packages for more functions and
information.

``` r
options(stringsAsFactors = FALSE)
library(tidyverse)
library(sf)
library(inborutils)
```

You find a bit more background about ‘why and what’, regarding the below
open standards, in [a separate
post](../../articles/geospatial_standards/) on this website.

In short, the GeoPackage and GeoJSON formats are ideal for exchange,
publication, interoperability & durability and to open science in
general.

## How to make and use GeoPackages (`*.gpkg`)

### Making a GeoPackage from a geospatial `sf` object in R

As an example, we download a geospatial layer of Special Areas of
Conservation in Flanders (version *sac\_2013-01-18*) from Zenodo:

``` r
# meeting a great function from the 'inborutils' package:
download_zenodo(doi = "10.5281/zenodo.3386815")
```

    ## [1] "md5sum 1fc2a8b5f56ad4ba05a999697e31626e for sac.dbf is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum e8c2db3e5567fbf7ef9c0f306fde20f2 for sac.prj is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum 945791898114a317581c5560d025e420 for sac.sbn is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum 7d75b87ca3aad3ae275ff447a1b2d75c for sac.sbx is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum ce6f5cbb37f35884f28053a4be765408 for sac.shp is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum 91094173055ff88e77355930464853a9 for sac.shx is correct."

*Did you know this: you can visit a website of this dataset by just
prefixing the DOI string \[1\] by `doi.org/`\!*

The data source is a shapefile, in this case consisting of 6 different
files. Read the geospatial data into R as an `sf` object, and let’s just
keep the essentials (though it doesn’t matter for the GeoPackage):

``` r
sac <- 
  read_sf("sac.shp") %>% 
  select(sac_code = GEBCODE,
         sac_name = NAAM,
         subsac_code = DEELGEBIED,
         polygon_id = POLY_ID)
```

Have a look at its contents by printing the object:

``` r
sac
```

    ## Simple feature collection with 616 features and 4 fields
    ## geometry type:  POLYGON
    ## dimension:      XY
    ## bbox:           xmin: 22084.25 ymin: 153207.4 xmax: 258865 ymax: 243333
    ## epsg (SRID):    NA
    ## proj4string:    +proj=lcc +lat_1=49.8333339 +lat_2=51.16666723333333 +lat_0=90 +lon_0=4.367486666666666 +x_0=150000.01256 +y_0=5400088.4378 +ellps=intl +units=m +no_defs
    ## # A tibble: 616 x 5
    ##    sac_code sac_name subsac_code polygon_id
    ##    <chr>    <chr>    <chr>            <int>
    ##  1 BE21000… Heesbos… BE2100020-4          1
    ##  2 BE21000… Heesbos… BE2100020-2          2
    ##  3 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-…          3
    ##  4 BE21000… Kalmtho… BE2100015-1          4
    ##  5 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-…          5
    ##  6 BE21000… Heesbos… BE2100020-6          6
    ##  7 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-…          7
    ##  8 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-…          8
    ##  9 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-5          9
    ## 10 BE21000… Vennen,… BE2100024-2         10
    ## # … with 606 more rows, and 1 more variable:
    ## #   geometry <POLYGON [m]>

To write the GeoPackage, we just use the GPKG driver of the powerful
[GDAL](https://gdal.org) library (supporting most open and some closed
formats), which can be elegantly accessed through `sf::st_write()`:

``` r
sac %>% 
  st_write("sac.gpkg")
```

    ## Updating layer `sac' to data source `sac.gpkg' using driver `GPKG'
    ## Writing 616 features with 4 fields and geometry type Polygon.

Is that all?  
***YES :-)***

Really?  
***YES :-)***

Well, hmmm, if you really want to know a little bit more…

A GeoPackage can contain many layers. So, it is good practice to
explicitly define the layer name within the GeoPackage (above, it was
automatically called ‘sac’). For example:

``` r
sac %>% 
  st_write("sac.gpkg",
           layer = "special_areas_conservation",
           delete_dsn = TRUE)
```

    ## Deleting source `sac.gpkg' using driver `GPKG'
    ## Updating layer `special_areas_conservation' to data source `sac.gpkg' using driver `GPKG'
    ## Writing 616 features with 4 fields and geometry type Polygon.

Note, `delete_dsn` was set as `TRUE` to replace the whole GeoPackage.
(There is also a `delete_layer` parameter to overwrite an existing
*layer* with the same name.)

### Reading a GeoPackage file

Can it become more simple than
    this?

``` r
sac_test <- st_read("sac.gpkg")
```

    ## Reading layer `special_areas_conservation' from data source `/media/floris/DATA/git_repositories/tutorials/content/tutorials/spatial_standards_vector/sac.gpkg' using driver `GPKG'
    ## Simple feature collection with 616 features and 4 fields
    ## geometry type:  POLYGON
    ## dimension:      XY
    ## bbox:           xmin: 22084.25 ymin: 153207.4 xmax: 258865 ymax: 243333
    ## epsg (SRID):    NA
    ## proj4string:    +proj=lcc +lat_1=49.8333339 +lat_2=51.16666723333333 +lat_0=90 +lon_0=4.367486666666666 +x_0=150000.01256 +y_0=5400088.4378 +ellps=intl +units=m +no_defs

Ready you are\!

Also other geospatial software will (or should be) able to open the
GeoPackage format. It is an open standard, after all\!

## How to make and use GeoJSON files (`*.geojson`)

### Making a GeoJSON file from a geospatial `sf` object in R

As another example, let’s download a shapefile of stream habitat 3260 in
Flanders (version
    *2018*):

``` r
download_zenodo(doi = "10.5281/zenodo.3386246")
```

    ## [1] "md5sum bd4b0efd270348de0f00bb02980d1d48 for habitatstreams.dbf is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum f881f61a6c07741b58cb618d8bbb0b99 for habitatstreams.prj is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum f8559b033303c7b110df2136d0ec24ee for habitatstreams.shp is correct."
    ## [1] "md5sum 1b9c3f98f63339ea374d10c75399657e for habitatstreams.shx is correct."

The data source is a shapefile again, in this case consisting of 4
different files. Similar as above, we read the geospatial data into R as
an `sf` object and select a few attributes to work with:

``` r
habitatstreams <- 
  read_sf("habitatstreams.shp") %>% 
  select(river_name = NAAM,
         source = BRON)
```

``` r
habitatstreams
```

    ## Simple feature collection with 560 features and 2 fields
    ## geometry type:  LINESTRING
    ## dimension:      XY
    ## bbox:           xmin: 33097.92 ymin: 157529.6 xmax: 254039 ymax: 243444.6
    ## epsg (SRID):    NA
    ## proj4string:    +proj=lcc +lat_1=49.8333339 +lat_2=51.16666723333333 +lat_0=90 +lon_0=4.367486666666666 +x_0=150000.01256 +y_0=5400088.4378 +ellps=intl +units=m +no_defs
    ## # A tibble: 560 x 3
    ##    river_name source
    ##    <chr>      <chr> 
    ##  1 WOLFPUTBE… VMM   
    ##  2 OUDE KALE  VMM   
    ##  3 VENLOOP    EcoInv
    ##  4 VENLOOP    EcoInv
    ##  5 KLEINE NE… EcoInv
    ##  6 KLEINE NE… EcoInv
    ##  7 KLEINE NE… EcoInv
    ##  8 KLEINE NE… EcoInv
    ##  9 RAAMDONKS… extra…
    ## 10 KLEINE NE… EcoInv
    ## # … with 550 more rows, and 1 more variable:
    ## #   geometry <LINESTRING [m]>

Nowadays, it is recommended to use the more recent and strict
**RFC7946** implementation of GeoJSON. The previous ‘GeoJSON 2008’
implementation is now obsoleted (see [the
post](../../articles/geospatial_standards/) on this tutorials website
for a bit more background).

The RFC7946 standard is well supported by GDAL’s GeoJSON driver, however
GDAL must be given the explicit option `RFC7946=YES` in order to use it
already \[2\].

Write the GeoJSON file as follows:

``` r
habitatstreams %>% 
  st_write("habitatstreams.geojson",
           layer_options = "RFC7946=YES")
```

    ## Writing layer `habitatstreams' to data source `habitatstreams.geojson' using driver `GeoJSON'
    ## options:        RFC7946=YES 
    ## Writing 560 features with 2 fields and geometry type Line String.

Done creating\!

### Do I look good?

Hey wait, wasn’t a GeoJSON file just a text file?  
***Indeed.***

So I can just open it as a text file to get an idea of its contents?  
***Well seen :-)***

Hence, also use it in versioned workflows?  
***Didn’t hear that. (Cool, though…)***

Let’s just look at the top 7 lines of the file:

    {
    "type": "FeatureCollection",
    "name": "habitatstreams",
    "features": [
    { "type": "Feature", "properties": { "river_name": "WOLFPUTBEEK", "source": "VMM" }, "geometry": { "type": "LineString", "coordinates": [ [ 4.0532635, 50.8196905 ], [ 4.0532327, 50.8197202 ], [ 4.0530778, 50.8197594 ], [ 4.0528708, 50.8199422 ], [ 4.052834, 50.8201498 ], [ 4.0528767, 50.8204559 ] ] } },
    { "type": "Feature", "properties": { "river_name": "OUDE KALE", "source": "VMM" }, "geometry": { "type": "LineString", "coordinates": [ [ 3.5931564, 51.0803318 ], [ 3.5930966, 51.0803266 ], [ 3.5927771, 51.0802782 ], [ 3.5926209, 51.080259 ], [ 3.5925707, 51.0802465 ], [ 3.5925106, 51.0802316 ], [ 3.592303, 51.0801396 ], [ 3.5921047, 51.0800302 ], [ 3.5920091, 51.0799694 ], [ 3.5919755, 51.0799432 ], [ 3.5919328, 51.07991 ], [ 3.5919165, 51.0798833 ] ] } },
    { "type": "Feature", "properties": { "river_name": "VENLOOP", "source": "EcoInv" }, "geometry": { "type": "LineString", "coordinates": [ [ 4.6443172, 51.1940245 ], [ 4.644403, 51.1938051 ], [ 4.6439364, 51.1937415 ], [ 4.6438717, 51.1936806 ], [ 4.6439146, 51.1934056 ] ] } },

You can see it basically lists the feature attributes and the
coordinates of the lines’ vertices, with each feature starting on a new
line.

Compare the coordinates with those of the `sf` object `habitatstreams`
above: the data have been reprojected on the fly to WGS84\!

Note: in order to be still manageable (text file size, usage in
versioning systems) it seems wise to use GeoJSON for more simple cases –
**points and rather simple lines and polygons** – and use the binary
GeoPackage format for larger (more complex) cases.

### Reading a GeoJSON file

Just do
    this:

``` r
habitatstreams_test <- st_read("habitatstreams.geojson")
```

    ## Reading layer `habitatstreams' from data source `/media/floris/DATA/git_repositories/tutorials/content/tutorials/spatial_standards_vector/habitatstreams.geojson' using driver `GeoJSON'
    ## Simple feature collection with 560 features and 2 fields
    ## geometry type:  LINESTRING
    ## dimension:      XY
    ## bbox:           xmin: 2.69742 ymin: 50.72875 xmax: 5.85425 ymax: 51.50032
    ## epsg (SRID):    4326
    ## proj4string:    +proj=longlat +datum=WGS84 +no_defs

Same story as for the GeoPackage: other geospatial software will (or
should be) able to open the GeoJSON format as well, as it’s an open and
well established standard.

From the message of `st_read()` you can see the CRS is WGS84
([EPSG-code 4326](https://epsg.io/4326)) - this is always expected when
reading a GeoJSON file.

If you want to transform the data to another CRS, e.g. Belgian Lambert
72 ([EPSG-code 31370](https://epsg.io/31370)), use `sf::st_transform()`:

``` r
habitatstreams_test %>% 
  st_transform(31370)
```

    ## Simple feature collection with 560 features and 2 fields
    ## geometry type:  LINESTRING
    ## dimension:      XY
    ## bbox:           xmin: 33013.71 ymin: 157590.5 xmax: 253945.9 ymax: 243502.9
    ## epsg (SRID):    31370
    ## proj4string:    +proj=lcc +lat_1=51.16666723333333 +lat_2=49.8333339 +lat_0=90 +lon_0=4.367486666666666 +x_0=150000.013 +y_0=5400088.438 +ellps=intl +towgs84=-106.8686,52.2978,-103.7239,0.3366,-0.457,1.8422,-1.2747 +units=m +no_defs
    ## First 10 features:
    ##        river_name   source
    ## 1     WOLFPUTBEEK      VMM
    ## 2       OUDE KALE      VMM
    ## 3         VENLOOP   EcoInv
    ## 4         VENLOOP   EcoInv
    ## 5     KLEINE NETE   EcoInv
    ## 6     KLEINE NETE   EcoInv
    ## 7     KLEINE NETE   EcoInv
    ## 8     KLEINE NETE   EcoInv
    ## 9  RAAMDONKSEBEEK extrapol
    ## 10    KLEINE NETE   EcoInv
    ##                          geometry
    ## 1  LINESTRING (127768.8 167742...
    ## 2  LINESTRING (95650.24 196973...
    ## 3  LINESTRING (169263.1 209374...
    ## 4  LINESTRING (169544 209352.8...
    ## 5  LINESTRING (180997 208666.5...
    ## 6  LINESTRING (179947.3 208419...
    ## 7  LINESTRING (180429.9 208655...
    ## 8  LINESTRING (187289.6 210058...
    ## 9  LINESTRING (183455.2 192468...
    ## 10 LINESTRING (183426.2 208321...

1.  DOI = Digital Object Identifier. See <https://www.doi.org>.

2.   Though GeoJSON 2008 is
    [obsoleted](http://geojson.org/geojson-spec.html), the now
    recommended [RFC7946](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7946) standard
    is still officially in a *proposal* stage. That is probably the
    reason why GDAL does not yet default to RFC7946. A somehow confusing
    stage, it seems.
