content/tutorials/r_inla/index.md, before:

---
title: "INLA workshops"
description: "Slides, code and data used during the INLA workshop"
author: "Thierry Onkelinx"
date: 2019-03-10
categories: ["r", "statistics"]
tags: ["r", "INLA", "inlabru", "analysis", "mixed model"]
---

These workshops are a follow-up of the course on "Spatial, temporal and spatial-temporal models using [R-INLA](http://www.r-inla.org/)" by Alain Zuur and Elena Ieno ([Highland Statistics Ltd.](http://www.highstat.com)). The main goal is the get people using R-INLA with their own data in a workshop setting so they can tap into the knowledge of others. The workshops are not a copy of the Highstat course but elaborate certain topics. We also introduce the [`inlatools`](https://inlatools.netlify.com) and [`inlabru`](http://inlabru.org). 

## Workshop 1

Fitting models with only fixed effects, random intercepts and first order random walk.

- [slides](https://inbo.github.io/tutorials/tutorials/r_inla/random_intercept.pdf)
- [source code and data](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/tree/master/content/tutorials/r_inla/random_intercept)
- [HackMD](https://hackmd.io/mzLJIfJZRySKzrmTXWi0Zg), a place to share your code related to this workshop.

## Workshop 2

Work in progress

## Workshop 3

Work in progress

Commit message:

update workshop page on website

content/tutorials/r_inla/index.md, after:

---
title: "INLA workshops"
description: "Slides, code and data used during the INLA workshop"
author: "Thierry Onkelinx"
date: 2019-03-10
categories: ["r", "statistics"]
tags: ["r", "INLA", "inlabru", "analysis", "mixed model"]
---

These workshops are a follow-up of the course on "Spatial, temporal and spatial-temporal models using [R-INLA](http://www.r-inla.org/)" by Alain Zuur and Elena Ieno ([Highland Statistics Ltd.](http://www.highstat.com)). The main goal is the get people using R-INLA with their own data in a workshop setting so they can tap into the knowledge of others. The workshops are not a copy of the Highstat course but elaborate certain topics. We also introduce the [`inlatools`](https://inlatools.netlify.com) and [`inlabru`](http://inlabru.org). 

[HackMD](https://hackmd.io/mzLJIfJZRySKzrmTXWi0Zg), a place to share your code related to these workshops.

## Workshop 1

Fitting models with only fixed effects, random intercepts and first order random walk.

- [slides](https://inbo.github.io/tutorials/tutorials/r_inla/random_intercept.pdf)
- [source code and data](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/tree/master/content/tutorials/r_inla/random_intercept)

## Workshop 2

`inlabru` versus `INLA` for fixed effects, random intercepts and random walks.

- [slides](https://inbo.github.io/tutorials/tutorials/r_inla/inlabru.pdf)
- [source code and data](https://github.com/inbo/tutorials/tree/master/content/tutorials/r_inla/inlabru)

## Workshop 3

Work in progress

## Literature

- Blangiardo, M. and Cameletti, M. 2015 Spatial and Spatio-temporal Bayesian Models with R-INLA https://sites.google.com/a/r-inla.org/stbook/ ISBN: 978-1-118-32655-8
- Gómez-Rubio, V. 2019 Bayesian inference with INLA and R-INLA https://becarioprecario.bitbucket.io/inla-gitbook/index.html
- Krainski, E. et al 2018 Advanced Spatial Modeling with Stochastic Partial Differential Equations Using R and INLA https://becarioprecario.bitbucket.io/spde-gitbook/index.html
- Wang, X. et al 2018 Bayesian Regression Modeling with INLA ISBN: 978-1-498-72725-9
- Zuur, A. et al 2017 Beginner's Guide to
Spatial, Temporal and Spatial-Temporal Ecological Data Analysis with R-INLA  http://highstat.com/index.php/beginner-s-guide-to-regression-models-with-spatial-and-temporal-correlation ISBN: 978-0-957-17419-1
- Zuur, A. and Ieno, E. 2018 Spatial, Temporal and Spatial-Temporal Ecological Data Analysis with R-INLA. Volume II: GAM and Zero-Inflated Models http://highstat.com/index.php/beginner-s-guide-to-regression-models-with-spatial-and-temporal-correlation ISBN: 978-0-957-17414-6
