content/tutorials/spatial_transform_balanced_samples/index.md, before:

---
title: "Mathematical Transformations of Spatially Balanced Samples"
description: "Channeling chaos into balanced, random point density distributions."
date: "2025-08-24"
authors: [falkmielke]
categories: ["development", "r"]
tags: ["spatial", "density", "distribution", "balanced", "sampling", "transformations", "functional programming"]
number-sections: true
link-citations: true
params:
  math: true
format:
  hugo-md:
    toc: false
    preserve_yaml: true
    html-math-method: katex
---

``` r
library("dplyr")
library("sf")
library("glue")
library("spbal")

library("ggplot2")
library("ggExtra")


# set specific seed for reproducability
location_id <- 42
set.seed(location_id)
```

<a id="sec-introduction"></a>

# Introduction

## Randomness is Chaos

Occasionally, one requires a set of points which are **randomly distributed** in a given area.

``` r
n_samples <- 2^8
x <- runif(n_samples)
y <- runif(n_samples)
data <- data.frame("x" = x, "y" = y)

par(pty = "s")
plot(data, pch = 21, col = "black")
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/totally-random-points-1.png" width="768" />

But then, you know, if we are honest, "random" might be a bit too random.

## Gradually Less Randomness

### (1) Your Inner Circle

There are options and choices to modify the randomness to our liking.

First of all, the square layout is not generally useful; imagine another common case where you want to randomly distribute points in a circle.
You could filter the circle within the square.

``` r
x0 <- 0.5
y0 <- 0.5
data <- data %>%
  mutate(r = sqrt((x - x0)^2 + (y - y0)^2)) %>%
  filter(r < 0.5) %>%
  select(-r)

par(pty = "s")
plot(data, pch = 21, col = "black")
title(glue::glue("N = {nrow(data)}"))
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/filter-circle-1.png" width="768" />

... but then, your sample size changes (lost about 20% of points).
So this is not of general use.

Below, I will demonstrate how to create a circular area covered with random points, by means of a simple polar coordinate transformation.

### (2) Find Your Spatial Balance

A second feature of the initial example random points is that they cluster randomly.
This means that some of the points are close together, and other areas are undersampled.

This has disadvantages, e.g. if you want to sample information about a geographic area.
Points proximal to existing measurements provide very little extra information (at least if [Tobler's Law](https://tutorials.inbo.be/tutorials/spatial_variograms) holds).
Yet, purposefully placing a measurement into "that previously missed open spot" bares the danger of bias, and the cost of potential future oversampling.

What we often desire is **spatially balanced sampling**:

<img
src="./fig1_spatially_balanced_circle.png"
id="fig-spatbalsamp"
alt="Figure 1: Spatially balanced sampling in a circular area." />
<figcaption>
Figure 1: Spatially balanced sampling in a circular area.
</figcaption>

<br>

<figcaption>Figure 1: Spatially balanced sampling in a circular area.</figcaption><br>

### (3) Choose Your Distribution Pattern

The figure above treats all points in the circle equally.
But then, there are special points in a circular area - obviously, its center.
And in many applications, it is a valid strategy to give points closer to the center a higher chance of being chosen, or to have a sampling pattern that reduces likelihood with distance from center, or just the opposite (i.e. bias towards the rim).

Anything goes.
In this tutorial, I will briefly demonstrate, how.

<a id="sec-Methods"></a>

# Methods

## Functional Programming

Throughout this tutorial, I will also apply some basic concepts of functional programming.
(Really just a tiny, superficial addition, nothing to worry about.)

As is the habit of my institute, I will use R.
R has strong libraries for spatial analysis (`sf`, `terra`), it is moderately good at [functional programming](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/Functional-programming.html) (with some severe let-downs, such as cumbersome workarounds for multiple return values), and it is only just catching up on object-oriented programming ([e.g. see here](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/S4.html)).

In this situation, the easiest way I found of implementing a system for basic school geometry are functions like the following wrappers to alleviate some of the unnecessary cumbersome-ness.

``` r
# create a two-element point coordinate from a single x and y
create_point <- function (x, y) t(as.matrix(c(x, y), byrows = TRUE, ncol = 2, nrow = 1))

# create a `sf` polygon from a point matrix, via an intermediate data frame
create_polygon <- function(point_matrix, coord_cols = NULL, crs = 31370) {

  if (is.null(coord_cols)) {
    coord_cols <- c("x", "y")
  }

  spatial_df <- as.data.frame(point_matrix) %>%
    setNames(coord_cols) %>%
    sf::st_as_sf(coords = coord_cols, crs = crs)

  return(sf::st_combine(spatial_df) %>% sf::st_cast("POLYGON", warn = FALSE))

}
```

These functions put in action for another trivial thing we require: a unit square[^1].

``` r
unit_square <- create_polygon(
  rbind(
    create_point(0, 0),
    create_point(0, 1),
    create_point(1, 1),
    create_point(1, 0),
    create_point(0, 0)
  )
)
```

We will return to it below.
The first task will be to get random points within that unit square.
Later, we will stretch and morph it to the desired area.

## Spatially Balanced Sampling

### Balanced Acceptance Sampling (BAS)

This method is a rather recent addition to the toolbox ([Robertson *et al.*, 2013](#ref-robertson2013)).
In my own words, which (much like an LLM chatbot) are in fact just the inaccurate transformation of the bunch of cryptic text my neural processing unit has attempted to decipher and categorize during some indefinite training period:
BAS uses mathematical sequences (feel free to read up on the "Halton sequence") which produce a desired number of quasi-random, multi-dimensional coordinates from a given starting point.
That those points are spatially balanced is rather a side-effect.
You can add some tweaks and priors to tune the outcome, and the authors claim that the algorithm is computationally efficient.

What else did I need to know?
The [library `spbal` does the job](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/spbal/vignettes/spbal.html) and worked immediately for my simple purpose here.

``` r
draw_unit_square_samples <- function(n_samples) {
  result <- spbal::BAS(sf::st_as_sf(unit_square, crs = NA), n = n_samples)
  samples <- result$sample %>% {.[, c("SiteID", "geometry")]}
  
  return(sf::st_coordinates(samples))

}

n_samples <- 2^8
coords <- draw_unit_square_samples(n_samples)

par(pty = "s")
plot(coords, pch = 21, col = "black")
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/spatial-sampling-1.png" width="768" />

{{% callout note %}}

One thing to keep in mind is spatial periodicity:
if one end of your sampled space directly wraps to the other, make sure the method you choose has no edge effects (under- or oversampling the adjacent areas around the rim).
If you think this is a rather rare corner case, think again once you encounter `phi` in the paragraphs below.

{{% /callout %}}

### Generalized Random Tesselation Stratified (GRTS) Sampling

You could equally well use another strategy for generating spatially balanced sample points, like GRTS ([Stevens & Olsen, 2003](#ref-stevens2003); [Stevens & Olsen, 2004](#ref-stevens2004)).

My leaky internalization procedure has generated the following brief summary of the method:
you divide a given area into quadrants of four "pixels" by recursive subdivision, give them an address (which is cleverly solved in a base-four number system), and by their arrangement and the characteristics of the address system you can cleverly retrieve spatially balanced subsets of any size from your base area.

Code example below (Thank you, Floris!).
Just note that this particular implementation requires a CRS to be specified; maybe you know a sufficiently generic one.

``` r
library("sf")
library("spsurvey")
samples <-
  st_polygon(list(matrix(
    c(0, 0,   1, 0, 
      1, 1,   0, 1, 
      0, 0    ),
    ncol = 2, byrow = TRUE
  ))) %>%
  st_sfc() %>%
  st_sf(crs = 31370) %>%
  grts(n_base = n_samples) %>%
  {.$sites_base[, c("siteID", "geometry")]}
plot(samples, pch = 21, col = "black")
```

{{% callout note %}}

A desirable feature of spatially balanced sampling is that the sample remains spatially balanced even if you just take a subset from it.
If I understood correctly, both BAS and GRTS have this feature, at least if you take a consecutive subset from the start of the series.

This also means that you can add samples to the end of the series later on.

{{% /callout %}}

<a id="sec-results"></a>

# Transformations

## Polar to Cartesian

To this point, we have a unit square and a number of points, evenly distributed throughout it.

But now, a major brain twister: imagine the sides of that unit square to be not `x` and `y`, as we are commonly used to, but an angle (direction) and a radius (distance).

This is easiest to understand in tabular form:
just take the values we have, and rename them to `phi` and `r`:

``` r
as_tibble(coords) %>%
  setNames(c("phi", "r")) %>%
  head(5) %>%
  knitr::kable()
```

|    phi |      r |
|-------:|-------:|
| 0.2301 | 0.3054 |
| 0.7301 | 0.6387 |
| 0.4801 | 0.9721 |
| 0.9801 | 0.0214 |
| 0.0270 | 0.3548 |

Because, to be honest, I have tricked you from the beginning:
The unit square was not a unit square in Cartesian space, but is a unit square in Polar coordinates.

If you are afraid of polar coordinates, fret not.
Next thing we will do is transform them back to our well-known `x` and `y`.
Though, one more thing: To be able to do more stretching and bending below, we will also prepare a tiny "transformation" algorithm (`apply_trafo`).
No worries about that either: we start with the "identity" transform [^2], and later try our more (or less) crazy stuff.

``` r
identity_trafo <- function(x) x

# apply a transformation to a df of coordinates
apply_trafo <- function(coord, trafo_fcn = identity_trafo, scale = 1) {

  # we simply transform
  coord <- trafo_fcn(coord)

  # scale the transformed coordinates back to the desired range (usually the unit interval)
  return(scale * coord / trafo_fcn(1.))
}
```

Functional programming basics:
the function `apply_transform` takes a function as an input argument.
It then applies it, but also does some more stuff (here: scaling).
We just invented a simple "wrapper".

Finally, we get our `x` and `y` back:

``` r
target_radius = 10 # m
angle_range = 2 * pi # radians

phi <- coords[, 1]
r <- coords[, 2]
phi_transformed <- apply_trafo(phi, scale = angle_range)
r_transformed <- apply_trafo(r, scale = target_radius)


convert_polar_to_cartesian <- function(distance, direction, rotation_rad = 0) {
  # convert to x/y
  x <- distance * cos(direction + rotation_rad)
  y <- distance * sin(direction + rotation_rad)
  
  return(data.frame("x" = x, "y" = y))
}

data <- convert_polar_to_cartesian(r_transformed, phi_transformed)

par(pty = "s")
plot(data, pch = 21, col = "black")
title(glue::glue("{nrow(data)} points, spatially balanced in a circle -- or not?"))
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/transform-polar-to-cartesian-1.png" width="768" />

Does the outcome surprise you?

## Spatial Balance - in a Weird Way

Note how the sample is still spatially balanced, but in an unexpected way:

-   At each distance from the center, there is an equal chance of finding a point.
-   Across all directions, points are uniformly distributed (i.e. everywhere the same chance to see points).

However, point density (the chance of finding a point in a given "pixel" window), is not homogeneous.
It is high, close to the center, and reduces towards the edges of our circle.
Logical, if you think about it: the orbits close to the center are much shorter, yet they house equally many points as the distant orbits.

This outcome might be fine in some situations, but undesired in others.

## Finding the Inverse Transformation

If we want to go for homogeneous point density in our circle, we need to nullify the tendency of our points to cluster round the center.
Even if you did pay attention in highschool maths, you might not immediately know which of the usual suspect functions counteract the "orbit effect", and in which direction to apply it.
Exponential? Gaussian? Polynomial? Hyperbolical? Just saying something.

To support my own sparse maths memory, I like to trial-and-error my way out.
What helps me are concise functions to test the same procedure over and over with altering input arguments.

``` r
# just the same procedure as above, with more points
test_trafos <- function(trafo_r = identity_trafo, trafo_phi = identity_trafo, n = 2^10) {

  coords <- draw_unit_square_samples(n)

  r <- apply_trafo(coords[, 2], trafo_r, scale = target_radius)
  phi <- apply_trafo(coords[, 1], trafo_phi, scale = angle_range)
  
  data <- convert_polar_to_cartesian(r, phi)
  
  return(data)
}


margin_plot <- function(data) {
  h <- ggplot(data, aes(x = x, y = y)) +
    geom_point() +
    theme_bw() +
    coord_fixed(ratio = 1)
  ggMarginal(h, type = "histogram", bins = 2^7)
}

# plot the distribution, using "identity", i.e. the re-transformed radii
margin_plot(test_trafos())
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/modify-trafo-function-1.png" width="768" />

You can inverse the "center-heavy" distribution.
Admitted, I trial-errored this initially, but the result makes sense:

-   the surface of a circle increases with \\(\sim r^2\\) (surface, because remember, we want to homogenize density)
-   square root is the inverse operation

So to get the distribution uniform, we apply the inverse.
(The skalar \\(\pi\\) does not matter because of the distance normalization above.)

``` r
inverse_radial <- function(x) sqrt(x)

par(pty = "s")
plot(test_trafos(), pch = 20, col = "grey") # for comparison: original points
points(test_trafos(trafo_r = inverse_radial), col = "darkred") # transformed points
title("the red and grey points are the same, before and after transformation")
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/find-inverse-trafo-1.png" width="768" />

You can also see this on the histogram of radii:

``` r
coords <- draw_unit_square_samples(2^10)
r <- apply_trafo(coords[, 2], inverse_radial, scale = target_radius)

hist(r, breaks = seq(0, target_radius, length.out = 2^6+1))
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/radius-histogram-1.png" width="768" />

Let us apply this to give the `test_trafos()` function above the option to uniformize prior to transformation.

``` r
test_unif <- function(trafo_r, ..., uniformize = TRUE) {

  if (uniformize) {
    trafo_r_unif <- function (x) trafo_r(sqrt(x))
  } else {
    trafo_r_unif <- trafo_r
  }

  data <- test_trafos(trafo_r = trafo_r_unif, ...) 
  
  return(data)
}

# trying the identity trafo
data <- test_unif(trafo_r = identity_trafo, n = 2^10)
margin_plot(data)
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/marginal-histograms-1.png" width="768" />

Nice, functional programming with the "ellipsis" (the "`...`" in the function signature).
Our `test_trafos` gained the extra capability of returning a spatially balanced distribution of points in a circle.

## Find Your Own Transformation

With these tools at hand, you can easily distribute the points in any radial pattern you like.

One more wrapper function to wrap this whole thing up:

``` r
trial <- function(test_trafo) {
  margin_plot(
    test_unif(
      trafo_r = test_trafo,
      n = 2^10,
      uniformize = TRUE
    )
  )
}
```

And, here you go, have fun:

``` r
trial(function(x) tan(x))
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/tan-pattern-1.png" width="768" />

``` r
trial(function(x) exp(x^2)-1)
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/square-exponential-1.png" width="768" />

You could move more density to the borders, giving bowl-shaped (marginal) distributions.

``` r
trial( function(x) atan(4*x) )
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/border-preference-1.png" width="768" />

{{% callout note %}}

Note that I transformed `r` and `phi` independently; in fact, I mostly just experimented with the distance.
The real fun stuff happens when transformation contains a combination of both (for example, as [this post implies](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2124869/converting-a-uniform-distribution-variable-to-a-normal-distribution-one), you could transform into a Gaussian).

{{% /callout %}}

Unfortunately, I did not manage to get periodical, concentric bands of points yet, but I suspect they require complex numbers.

``` r
trial( function(x) x + sin(16 * x) ) 
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/periodicity-1.png" width="768" />

You now possess the basic tooling and can take these ideas and concepts further, for your own good.

<a id="sec-summary"></a>

# Summary

In this tutorial, I assembled several simple but useful tools to homogeneously, but randomly distribute a given number of points in a circular area.
This originated from the practical need to identify random points in not perfectly random places.
The procedure draws from existing, widely acknowledged methods; no claim of novelty from my side.

On the one hand, there are algorithms for spatially balanced sampling, and I copy-pasted code to use the standard toolboxes for **GRTS** and **BAS**.
On the other hand, a series of mathematical operations can transform polar coordinates of balanced samples into cartesian space, then revert the associated distribution patterns, and then go wild by superimposing new distribution schemes.

A major philosophical question remains, and I will leave it up to you to make up your mind about it.
After all these choices and adjustments, can we still talk about a random distribution?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

As always, I hope this is useful for someone, and I appreciate your feedback and additions.

<a id="sec-references"></a>

# References and Notes

Robertson B.L., Brown J.A., McDonald T. & Jaksons P. (2013). BAS: Balanced Acceptance Sampling of Natural Resources. Biometrics 69 (3): 776--784. <https://doi.org/10.1111/biom.12059>.

Stevens D.L. & Olsen A.R. (2003). Variance estimation for spatially balanced samples of environmental resources. Environmetrics 14 (6): 593--610. <https://doi.org/10.1002/env.606>.

Stevens D.L. & Olsen A.R. (2004). Spatially Balanced Sampling of Natural Resources. Journal of the American Statistical Association 99 (465): 262--278. <https://doi.org/10.1198/016214504000000250>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1]: "Unit" indicates that the dimension extent of all relevant dimensions is one (i.e. one in the chosen units). For example, a unit square spans the area from points (0, 0) to point (1, 1), and a unit circle has a radius of 1 and goes 1 full round.

[^2]: "Identity" is just maths-speak for something that is identical on both sides of an equation, such as a function / projection / transformation for which the output always equals the input (take `y = x`).

Commit message:

trafo_spat_bal: note on interval

content/tutorials/spatial_transform_balanced_samples/index.md, after:



---
title: "Mathematical Transformations of Spatially Balanced Samples"
description: "Channeling chaos into balanced, random point density distributions."
date: "2025-08-24"
authors: [falkmielke]
categories: ["development", "r"]
tags: ["spatial", "density", "distribution", "balanced", "sampling", "transformations", "functional programming"]
number-sections: true
link-citations: true
params:
  math: true
format:
  hugo-md:
    toc: false
    preserve_yaml: true
    html-math-method: katex
---

``` r
library("dplyr")
library("sf")
library("glue")
library("spbal")

library("ggplot2")
library("ggExtra")


# set specific seed for reproducability
location_id <- 42
set.seed(location_id)
```

<a id="sec-introduction"></a>

# Introduction

## Randomness is Chaos

Occasionally, one requires a set of points which are **randomly distributed** in a given area.

``` r
n_samples <- 2^8
x <- runif(n_samples)
y <- runif(n_samples)
data <- data.frame("x" = x, "y" = y)

par(pty = "s")
plot(data, pch = 21, col = "black")
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/totally-random-points-1.png" width="768" />

But then, you know, if we are honest, "random" might be a bit too random.

## Gradually Less Randomness

### (1) Your Inner Circle

There are options and choices to modify the randomness to our liking.

First of all, the square layout is not generally useful; imagine another common case where you want to randomly distribute points in a circle.
You could filter the circle within the square.

``` r
x0 <- 0.5
y0 <- 0.5
data <- data %>%
  mutate(r = sqrt((x - x0)^2 + (y - y0)^2)) %>%
  filter(r < 0.5) %>%
  select(-r)

par(pty = "s")
plot(data, pch = 21, col = "black")
title(glue::glue("N = {nrow(data)}"))
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/filter-circle-1.png" width="768" />

... but then, your sample size changes (lost about 20% of points).
So this is not of general use.

Below, I will demonstrate how to create a circular area covered with random points, by means of a simple polar coordinate transformation.

### (2) Find Your Spatial Balance

A second feature of the initial example random points is that they cluster randomly.
This means that some of the points are close together, and other areas are undersampled.

This has disadvantages, e.g. if you want to sample information about a geographic area.
Points proximal to existing measurements provide very little extra information (at least if [Tobler's Law](https://tutorials.inbo.be/tutorials/spatial_variograms) holds).
Yet, purposefully placing a measurement into "that previously missed open spot" bares the danger of bias, and the cost of potential future oversampling.

What we often desire is **spatially balanced sampling**:

<img
src="./fig1_spatially_balanced_circle.png"
id="fig-spatbalsamp"
alt="Figure 1: Spatially balanced sampling in a circular area." />
<figcaption>
Figure 1: Spatially balanced sampling in a circular area.
</figcaption>

<br>

<figcaption>Figure 1: Spatially balanced sampling in a circular area.</figcaption><br>

### (3) Choose Your Distribution Pattern

The figure above treats all points in the circle equally.
But then, there are special points in a circular area - obviously, its center.
And in many applications, it is a valid strategy to give points closer to the center a higher chance of being chosen, or to have a sampling pattern that reduces likelihood with distance from center, or just the opposite (i.e. bias towards the rim).

Anything goes.
In this tutorial, I will briefly demonstrate, how.

<a id="sec-Methods"></a>

# Methods

## Functional Programming

Throughout this tutorial, I will also apply some basic concepts of functional programming.
(Really just a tiny, superficial addition, nothing to worry about.)

As is the habit of my institute, I will use R.
R has strong libraries for spatial analysis (`sf`, `terra`), it is moderately good at [functional programming](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/Functional-programming.html) (with some severe let-downs, such as cumbersome workarounds for multiple return values), and it is only just catching up on object-oriented programming ([e.g. see here](http://adv-r.had.co.nz/S4.html)).

In this situation, the easiest way I found of implementing a system for basic school geometry are functions like the following wrappers to alleviate some of the unnecessary cumbersome-ness.

``` r
# create a two-element point coordinate from a single x and y
create_point <- function (x, y) t(as.matrix(c(x, y), byrows = TRUE, ncol = 2, nrow = 1))

# create a `sf` polygon from a point matrix, via an intermediate data frame
create_polygon <- function(point_matrix, coord_cols = NULL, crs = 31370) {

  if (is.null(coord_cols)) {
    coord_cols <- c("x", "y")
  }

  spatial_df <- as.data.frame(point_matrix) %>%
    setNames(coord_cols) %>%
    sf::st_as_sf(coords = coord_cols, crs = crs)

  return(sf::st_combine(spatial_df) %>% sf::st_cast("POLYGON", warn = FALSE))

}
```

These functions put in action for another trivial thing we require: a unit square[^1].

``` r
unit_square <- create_polygon(
  rbind(
    create_point(0, 0),
    create_point(0, 1),
    create_point(1, 1),
    create_point(1, 0),
    create_point(0, 0)
  )
)
```

We will return to it below.
The first task will be to get random points within that unit square.
Later, we will stretch and morph it to the desired area.

## Spatially Balanced Sampling

### Balanced Acceptance Sampling (BAS)

This method is a rather recent addition to the toolbox ([Robertson *et al.*, 2013](#ref-robertson2013)).
In my own words, which (much like an LLM chatbot) are in fact just the inaccurate transformation of the bunch of cryptic text my neural processing unit has attempted to decipher and categorize during some indefinite training period:
BAS uses mathematical sequences (feel free to read up on the "Halton sequence") which produce a desired number of quasi-random, multi-dimensional coordinates from a given starting point.
That those points are spatially balanced is rather a side-effect.
You can add some tweaks and priors to tune the outcome, and the authors claim that the algorithm is computationally efficient.

What else did I need to know?
The [library `spbal` does the job](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/spbal/vignettes/spbal.html) and worked immediately for my simple purpose here.

``` r
draw_unit_square_samples <- function(n_samples) {
  result <- spbal::BAS(sf::st_as_sf(unit_square, crs = NA), n = n_samples)
  samples <- result$sample %>% {.[, c("SiteID", "geometry")]}
  
  return(sf::st_coordinates(samples))

}

n_samples <- 2^8
coords <- draw_unit_square_samples(n_samples)

par(pty = "s")
plot(coords, pch = 21, col = "black")
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/spatial-sampling-1.png" width="768" />

{{% callout note %}}

One thing to keep in mind is spatial periodicity:
if one end of your sampled space directly wraps to the other, make sure the method you choose has no edge effects (under- or oversampling the adjacent areas around the rim).
If you think this is a rather rare corner case, think again once you encounter `phi` in the paragraphs below.

{{% /callout %}}

### Generalized Random Tesselation Stratified (GRTS) Sampling

You could equally well use another strategy for generating spatially balanced sample points, like GRTS ([Stevens & Olsen, 2003](#ref-stevens2003); [Stevens & Olsen, 2004](#ref-stevens2004)).

My leaky internalization procedure has generated the following brief summary of the method:
you divide a given area into quadrants of four "pixels" by recursive subdivision, give them an address (which is cleverly solved in a base-four number system), and by their arrangement and the characteristics of the address system you can cleverly retrieve spatially balanced subsets of any size from your base area.

Code example below (Thank you, Floris!).
Just note that this particular implementation requires a CRS to be specified; maybe you know a sufficiently generic one.

``` r
library("sf")
library("spsurvey")
samples <-
  st_polygon(list(matrix(
    c(0, 0,   1, 0, 
      1, 1,   0, 1, 
      0, 0    ),
    ncol = 2, byrow = TRUE
  ))) %>%
  st_sfc() %>%
  st_sf(crs = 31370) %>%
  grts(n_base = n_samples) %>%
  {.$sites_base[, c("siteID", "geometry")]}
plot(samples, pch = 21, col = "black")
```

{{% callout note %}}

A desirable feature of spatially balanced sampling is that the sample remains spatially balanced even if you just take a subset from it.
If I understood correctly, both BAS and GRTS have this feature, at least if you take a consecutive subset from the start of the series.

This also means that you can add samples to the end of the series later on.

{{% /callout %}}

<a id="sec-results"></a>

# Transformations

## Polar to Cartesian

To this point, we have a unit square and a number of points, evenly distributed throughout it.

But now, a major brain twister: imagine the sides of that unit square to be not `x` and `y`, as we are commonly used to, but an angle (direction) and a radius (distance).

This is easiest to understand in tabular form:
just take the values we have, and rename them to `phi` and `r`:

``` r
as_tibble(coords) %>%
  setNames(c("phi", "r")) %>%
  head(5) %>%
  knitr::kable()
```

|    phi |      r |
|-------:|-------:|
| 0.2301 | 0.3054 |
| 0.7301 | 0.6387 |
| 0.4801 | 0.9721 |
| 0.9801 | 0.0214 |
| 0.0270 | 0.3548 |

Because, to be honest, I have tricked you from the beginning:
The unit square was not a unit square in Cartesian space, but is a **unit square in Polar coordinates**.

If you are afraid of polar coordinates, fret not, because the next thing we will do is to transform them back to our well-known `x` and `y`.
Though, one more thing: To be able to do more stretching and bending below, we will also prepare a tiny "transformation" algorithm (`apply_trafo`).
No worries about that either: we start with the "identity" transform [^2], and later try our more (or less) crazy stuff.

``` r
identity_trafo <- function(x) x

# apply a transformation to a df of coordinates
apply_trafo <- function(coord, trafo_fcn = identity_trafo, scale = 1) {

  # we simply transform
  coord <- trafo_fcn(coord)

  # scale the transformed coordinates back to the desired range (usually the unit interval)
  return(scale * coord / trafo_fcn(1.))
}
```

Functional programming basics:
the function `apply_transform` takes a function as an input argument.
It then applies it, but also does some more stuff (here: scaling).
We just invented a simple "wrapper".

Finally, we get our `x` and `y` back:

``` r
target_radius = 10 # m
angle_range = 2 * pi # radians

phi <- coords[, 1]
r <- coords[, 2]
phi_transformed <- apply_trafo(phi, scale = angle_range)
r_transformed <- apply_trafo(r, scale = target_radius)


convert_polar_to_cartesian <- function(distance, direction, rotation_rad = 0) {
  # convert to x/y
  x <- distance * cos(direction + rotation_rad)
  y <- distance * sin(direction + rotation_rad)
  
  return(data.frame("x" = x, "y" = y))
}

data <- convert_polar_to_cartesian(r_transformed, phi_transformed)

par(pty = "s")
plot(data, pch = 21, col = "black")
title(glue::glue("{nrow(data)} points, spatially balanced in a circle -- or not?"))
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/transform-polar-to-cartesian-1.png" width="768" />

Does the outcome surprise you?

## Spatial Balance - in a Weird Way

Note how the sample is still spatially balanced, but in an unexpected way:

-   At each distance from the center, there is an equal chance of finding a point.
-   Across all directions, points are uniformly distributed (i.e. everywhere the same chance to see points).

However, point density (the chance of finding a point in a given "pixel" window), is not homogeneous.
It is high, close to the center, and reduces towards the edges of our circle.
Logical, if you think about it: the orbits close to the center are much shorter, yet they house equally many points as the distant orbits.

This outcome might be fine in some situations, but undesired in others.

## Finding the Inverse Transformation

If we want to go for homogeneous point density in our circle, we need to nullify the tendency of our points to cluster round the center.
Even if you did pay attention in highschool maths, you might not immediately know which of the usual suspect functions counteract the "orbit effect", and in which direction to apply it.
Exponential? Gaussian? Polynomial? Hyperbolical? Just saying something.

To support my own sparse maths memory, I like to trial-and-error my way out.
What helps me are concise functions to test the same procedure over and over with altering input arguments.

``` r
# just the same procedure as above, with more points
test_trafos <- function(trafo_r = identity_trafo, trafo_phi = identity_trafo, n = 2^10) {

  coords <- draw_unit_square_samples(n)

  r <- apply_trafo(coords[, 2], trafo_r, scale = target_radius)
  phi <- apply_trafo(coords[, 1], trafo_phi, scale = angle_range)
  
  data <- convert_polar_to_cartesian(r, phi)
  
  return(data)
}


margin_plot <- function(data) {
  h <- ggplot(data, aes(x = x, y = y)) +
    geom_point() +
    theme_bw() +
    coord_fixed(ratio = 1)
  ggMarginal(h, type = "histogram", bins = 2^7)
}

# plot the distribution, using "identity", i.e. the re-transformed radii
margin_plot(test_trafos())
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/modify-trafo-function-1.png" width="768" />

You can inverse the "center-heavy" distribution.
Admitted, I trial-errored this initially, but the result makes sense:

-   the surface of a circle increases with \\(\sim r^2\\) (surface, because remember, we want to homogenize density)
-   square root is the inverse operation

So to get the distribution uniform, we apply the inverse.
(The skalar \\(\pi\\) does not matter because of the distance normalization above.)

``` r
inverse_radial <- function(x) sqrt(x)

par(pty = "s")
plot(test_trafos(), pch = 20, col = "grey") # for comparison: original points
points(test_trafos(trafo_r = inverse_radial), col = "darkred") # transformed points
title("the red and grey points are the same, before and after transformation")
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/find-inverse-trafo-1.png" width="768" />

You can also see this on the histogram of radii:

``` r
coords <- draw_unit_square_samples(2^10)
r <- apply_trafo(coords[, 2], inverse_radial, scale = target_radius)

hist(r, breaks = seq(0, target_radius, length.out = 2^6+1))
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/radius-histogram-1.png" width="768" />

Let us apply this to give the `test_trafos()` function above the option to uniformize prior to transformation.

``` r
test_unif <- function(trafo_r, ..., uniformize = TRUE) {

  if (uniformize) {
    trafo_r_unif <- function (x) trafo_r(sqrt(x))
  } else {
    trafo_r_unif <- trafo_r
  }

  data <- test_trafos(trafo_r = trafo_r_unif, ...) 
  
  return(data)
}

# trying the identity trafo
data <- test_unif(trafo_r = identity_trafo, n = 2^10)
margin_plot(data)
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/marginal-histograms-1.png" width="768" />

Nice, functional programming with the "ellipsis" (the "`...`" in the function signature).
Our `test_trafos` gained the extra capability of returning a spatially balanced distribution of points in a circle.

## Find Your Own Transformation

With these tools at hand, you can easily distribute the points in any radial pattern you like.

One more wrapper function to wrap this whole thing up:

``` r
trial <- function(test_trafo) {
  margin_plot(
    test_unif(
      trafo_r = test_trafo,
      n = 2^10,
      uniformize = TRUE
    )
  )
}
```

And, here you go, have fun:

``` r
trial(function(x) tan(x))
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/tan-pattern-1.png" width="768" />

``` r
trial(function(x) exp(x^2))
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/square-exponential-1.png" width="768" />

Oh... Wait...
What happened here?

Ah, yes!

{{% callout note %}}

In the present implementation, transformation functions best transform to an interval which starts at zero, and goes positive.
For example, the exponential function can be shifted down by one.

{{% /callout %}}

``` r
trial(function(x) exp(x^2)-1)
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/square-exponential-minus-one-1.png" width="768" />

You could move more density to the borders, giving bowl-shaped (marginal) distributions.

``` r
trial( function(x) atan(4*x) )
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/border-preference-1.png" width="768" />

{{% callout note %}}

Note that I herein transformed `r` and `phi` independently; in fact, I mostly just experimented with the distance.
The real fun stuff happens when transformation contains a combination of both (for example, as [this post implies](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2124869/converting-a-uniform-distribution-variable-to-a-normal-distribution-one), you could transform into a Gaussian).

{{% /callout %}}

Unfortunately, I did not manage to get periodical, concentric bands of points yet, but I suspect they require complex numbers.

``` r
trial( function(x) x + sin(16 * x) ) 
```

<img src="index.markdown_strict_files/figure-markdown_strict/periodicity-1.png" width="768" />

You now possess the basic tooling and can take these ideas and concepts further, for your own good.

<a id="sec-summary"></a>

# Summary

In this tutorial, I assembled several simple but useful tools to homogeneously, but randomly distribute a given number of points in a circular area.
This originated from the practical need to identify random points in not perfectly random places.
The procedure draws from existing, widely acknowledged methods; no claim of novelty from my side.

On the one hand, there are algorithms for spatially balanced sampling, and I copy-pasted code to use the standard toolboxes for **GRTS** and **BAS**.
On the other hand, a series of mathematical operations can transform polar coordinates of balanced samples into cartesian space, then revert the associated distribution patterns, and then go wild by superimposing new distribution schemes.

A major philosophical question remains, and I will leave it up to you to make up your mind about it.
After all these choices and adjustments, can we still talk about a random distribution?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

As always, I hope this is useful for someone, and I appreciate your feedback and additions.

<a id="sec-references"></a>

# References and Notes

Robertson B.L., Brown J.A., McDonald T. & Jaksons P. (2013). BAS: Balanced Acceptance Sampling of Natural Resources. Biometrics 69 (3): 776--784. <https://doi.org/10.1111/biom.12059>.

Stevens D.L. & Olsen A.R. (2003). Variance estimation for spatially balanced samples of environmental resources. Environmetrics 14 (6): 593--610. <https://doi.org/10.1002/env.606>.

Stevens D.L. & Olsen A.R. (2004). Spatially Balanced Sampling of Natural Resources. Journal of the American Statistical Association 99 (465): 262--278. <https://doi.org/10.1198/016214504000000250>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1]: "Unit" indicates that the dimension extent of all relevant dimensions is one (i.e. one in the chosen units). For example, a unit square spans the area from points (0, 0) to point (1, 1), and a unit circle has a radius of 1 and goes 1 full round.

[^2]: "Identity" is just maths-speak for something that is identical on both sides of an equation, such as a function / projection / transformation for which the output always equals the input (take `y = x`).
