content/tutorials/r_keyring/index.md, before:

---
title: "The `keyring` package: We can do better than `*******`."
description: "Using your system keyring for storing and accessing secrets from within R via the `keyring` package"
date: "2025-09-05"
authors: [falkmielke]
categories: ["development", "r"]
tags: ["secrets", "keyring", "passwords", "credentials", "r", "scripting"]
number-sections: true
link-citations: true
params:
  math: true
format:
  hugo-md:
    toc: false
    preserve_yaml: true
    html-math-method: katex
---

What do the software "giants" Cisco, Ivanti, and Atlassian all have in common?
They all (repeatedly) raised negative attention in the past by [pushing hardcoded, unencrypted credentials to the public](https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/search/?q=hardcoded+credentials).

This brief tutorial will help you to not be the poor intern who is rightfully expelled for such a fatal beginners' mistake.

The programming environment we will use is R.
The package of choice is [`keyring`](https://keyring.r-lib.org/index.html), but it will be spiced up with some extra precautions.

# How it Works: the Diary

Imagine that you are age fourteen again, sitting in your room in the evening and reflecting the day, still aroused by that encounter at school with that attractive same-aged conspecific who subtly expressed interest in you after lunchbreak.
*First love is tough.*

No way you would tell anyone about this: your friends would lay on the floor giggling as is habit at the age; and of course not your parents (how embarassing would that be).
It is all new, emotions are going rampage -
best time to keep them private.

But to sort these secret new emotions, it would be good to put them to paper.
**Let us see what options you have to store our secret thoughts.**

1\. You could just write them on a *plain paper* on your desk.

Good that they are sorted.
Bad that anyone can read them: mum, pa, and that annoying little brother.

This is what we call *"hardcoded, unencrypted"* storage, and it is precicely what needs to be avoided.

2\. You can write them in a *diary with a lock*.

Better.
Yet if someone has the key, or can xray-view the text in the diary, your secrets are still exposed.

3\. You can write in a secret language (*encryption*), in a locked diary.

It turns out that your computer already has such a diary place, a safe space where it can store secrets and credentials.
It is called the **"system keyring"**.
The system keyring lives on your [operating system](https://keyring.r-lib.org/index.html), and can be used to temporarily or permanently store any secrets in working memory.

Storing secrets in RAM is like the plain paper option above, so smart computer engineers also gave us the lock and the secret language.

And here is where it gets useful:
you can manage the keyring from within *R*, to automate secrecy in your scripts.
Guess what: the package is called `keyring`.

``` r
library("keyring")
library("getPass") # for some additional tweaks, see below.
```

Some further constraints:

-   You do not want to get caught/observed writing your secrets, prior to encryption, which is why we will also use `getPass` in some situations.
-   Just like a diary, your secrets can potentially get lost in any of the options above, they are more or less volatile / persistent. Keep that in mind, and don't complain to me if you loose one.

# The Naïve Keyring Failure

## Simple Usage

The `keyring` package [is simple to use](https://keyring.r-lib.org/index.html#usage), and your system keyring is normally in place.

For most common use, you might want to get away with

``` r
keyring::key_set("diary-entry-1")
keyring::key_get("diary-entry-1")
```

And, admitted, I used keyring like so for quite a while now.
However, then I noticed a serious problem, which is there by design:

{{% callout note %}}

-   The default keyring is not password-locked: it gets unlocked at user login.
-   The system secrets persist across R sessions, potentially even across reboots.

{{% /callout %}}

This is an unfortunate combination: it means that if you used `key_set`, and entered your password, you are in a worse situation than before.
You just created a diary without a lock and left it on your desk, so that everyone who likes can just enter your room and read that good-looking Mickey gave you a compliment about your new braces :blush:.

In computer terms: anyone who comes to your computer can access the recent passwords in a new R session with `key_get`.
If I am not mistaken, passwords in some keyrings even persist reboots, yet I did not test.

What a lousy vault.
Laxity killed secrecy.

## Creating a Custom Keyring

Lesson learned: you **always** want to create a custom keyring.
And this is actually what the authors of `keyring` correctly explain [in the "Usage" section](https://keyring.r-lib.org/index.html#usage).

``` r
keyring_create(keyring = "vault")
```

On my computer, in a fresh R terminal, this single command initiated three things which happen in a row.

... i. Asks the user for a password on the terminal.

... ii. Opens a (very neat) popup window which asks for password and confirmation, indicating password strength.

... iii. Issues a warning that `Password ignored, will be read interactively`.

This might be confusing, and three passwords seem one too much.
I guess this is historic burden, or compatibility for headless systems, and found that in my workflow I can safely get rid of points (i) and (iii) by instead using the following:

``` r
suppressWarnings(keyring_create(keyring = "vault", password = ""))
```

The first password is given as empty string, and thus not prompted, and the ignorant warning message gets suppressed.

It is possible to wrap this in a function and shadow the package function:

``` r
keyring_create <- function(...) {
  suppressWarnings(
    keyring::keyring_create(..., password = "")
  )
}
```

Here you go, a personal keyring which we can use to store secrets.
It is locked and unlocked with a master password, and any secrets stored inside will be encrypted.
Keep in mind that your keyring will not lock automatically and will survive a reboot, unless you delete it.

More on all that, below.

# Managing Keys

## Stowing Secrets

Now that we have a place to stow our secrets, let's use it.

``` r
key_set(
  service = "diary",
  username = "mickey",
  keyring = "vault"
)
```

Note that the function takes a `service`, which I think of as a sort of category within a `keyring`.
Turns out that I can use my vault to store different kind of things: passwords, money, photos of ex girlfriends...
Here, I named it `diary`, for the sake of analogy.

Then, there is the `username`, which makes sense in a service created for storing username-password credentials.
You ask the "diary"-service of your "vault"-keyring for the password of/to "mickey".
Generally, think of it as a label, or a secret phrase[^1] which you provide to your vault when you want to retrieve your secret...

## Recovering Secrets

### Naïve Getting

And that would work like so:

``` r
key_get("diary", "mickey", keyring = "vault")
```

    [1] "Python is better than R!"

Wait...

OMG...

Why did my R console just print that top secret passphrase I entered earlier?!

### Invisible Getting

You might consider using `invisible(key_get(...))`, or even generally:

``` r
key_get <- function(...) invisible(keyring::key_get(...))
```

*Welcome to next level paranoia.*

However, this indicates what I think `keyring` is actually made for:
you actually want to assign your secrets to some variable, temporarily and on-the-fly, as in

``` r
database_connection <- DBI::dbConnect(
  RPostgres::Postgres(),
  dbname = "my_database",
  host = "localhost",
  port = 5439,
  user = "mickey",
  password = key_get("diary", "mickey", keyring = "vault") 
) # just an example...
```

### Scripted Getting: Interactive Pitfalls

Conclusion:

{{% callout note %}}

The main use case of `keyring` are scripts and code chains which repeatedly use secrets (because, if it was not repeatedly, `getPass` would be fine).
In these situations, `keyring` helps you to avoid te worse options of (a) hardcoding your secrets or (b) having to type them over and over again.

{{% /callout %}}

However, that did not quite work out for me.
The reason lies in the distinction between R's `interactive()` and non-interactive execution mode for using `key_set`.

What does *(non-)interactive* mean?

Say you have an automated process: a script which will write all the secret events of the day into your diary.
Or a script which performs data processes on an SQL database.
The script is called `secrecy_processing.R`, contains a call to `key_set`, and is run prior to executing other scripts.

The working of `key_set(...)` in there depends on whether you run the code inside that script from a system terminal, like in `Rscript secrecy_processing.R`, or from the R console or another script, e.g. `source('secrecy_processing.R')`.
The second situation, *interactive mode*, is equivalend to what RStudio does, and works conveniently for most users.

Yet in case you have an automated `isFALSE(interactive())` process, one that you run from a terminal or via a `cronjob` (exactly where `keyring` shines), `key_set` fails because it takes continuous input: it will just use the next line that it receives and think it is the password.

This is a weird quirk[^2] which has caused me some headache, but at least I [learned about R's `interactive` mode](https://stackoverflow.com/a/27114322) on the way.

Here is the workaround: `keyring` brings a function to `key_set_with_value` with a password argument, which can be customized.

``` r
# takes the arguments `service`, `username` and `keyring`
key_set <- function(...) {
  # check whether this is executed in interactive mode
  if (interactive()) {
    keyring::key_set(...)
  } else {
    # when run as a script, getPass will wait for user input
    keyring::key_set_with_value(
      ...,
      password = getPass::getPass("Please enter your secret:")
    )
  }
}

# example usage
key_set(
  service = "diary",
  username = "mickey",
  keyring = "vault"
)

# print(key_get("diary", "mickey", keyring = "vault"))
```

This could be solved with `readLines("stdin", n = 1)`, yet then the user input is visible in plain text during typing.
The next best terminal solution I found is the R library `getPass`.
You could also search for a dialog box option to enter the password, or a confirmation mechanism.

Another option would be to use [`configr`](https://github.com/Miachol/configr) and store a config file with secrets in a system vault (e.g. with ["tomb"](https://dyne.org/tomb/)).

Get creative.

### Locking and Unlocking

You might notice that, once your keyring is created, the master password is rarely asked again.
*What good is a vault for if you do not lock the door?*

At the end of your script, or even better: after finishing an operation, you might want to lock your keyring.

``` r
keyring_lock(keyring = "vault")
# keyring_unlock(keyring = "vault")
```

This is critical:
Because you work on the **system keyring**, your keyring stays open even after the R sessions closed.

Normally, it should be locked upon reboot.
However, it is good practice to "consciously" lock your keyrings whenever you procedure using it has finished.

{{% callout note %}}

**Always** make sure that your keyring is locked when the work is finished.

{{% /callout %}}

It might be even better practice to already schedule the closing of your keyring at the moment you open it.
Just so you don't forget to leave your door open when you leave.

``` r
keyring_unlock <- function(keyring = NULL, ...) {

  # unlock the keyring
  keyring::keyring_unlock(keyring = keyring, ...)
  
  # plan a procedure to lock it when the R session ends
  # https://stackoverflow.com/a/41179916
  reg.finalizer(
    .GlobalEnv,
    function(e) {
      keyring::keyring_lock(keyring = keyring)
      message(glue::glue("Keyring `{keyring}` locked."))
    },
    onexit = TRUE # I wonder whether you could also set a timer...
  )

  return(invisible(NULL))
}

keyring_unlock(keyring = "vault")
```

(Requires an explicit `keyring_unlock` prior to any `key_set` or `key_get` operation.)

For the Linux operating system, I assembled a function which will spawn a background process for delayed locking of the keyring:

``` r
# lock the keyring after a delay
lock_keyring_delayed <- function(keyring_label, delay = 300) {

  stopifnot("glue" = require("glue"))
  stopifnot("keyring" = require("keyring"))

  # string building blocks
  l <- glue::glue('\"{keyring_label}\"')
  k <- 'keyring::keyring_'
  x <- glue::glue('({l} %in% keyring::keyring_list()$keyring)')

  # this only works on linux
  if (isFALSE(.Platform$OS.type == "unix")) {
    message(glue::glue("
      (keyring will not lock with delay;
       invoke 'keyring::keyring_lock({l})')
    "))
    return(invisible(NULL))
  }

  # build the core script
  cmd <- glue::glue(
    "Rscript -e 'if ({x} && isFALSE({k}is_locked({l}))) {k}lock({l})'"
    #  && echo 'slam!' # <- for testing
  )

  # background-execute the script with a delay
  system(glue::glue("sleep {delay} && {cmd} &", wait = FALSE))

} # /lock_keyring_delayed
```

However, that still leaves the keyring on the system.

# Cleanup

After using all this for a while, you might begin to hear a sort of metallic rattling noise whenever you start moving.
These are all the keys on your dear old `keyring` which you are bringing along but forgot about.

``` r
key_list()
key_list(keyring = "vault")
```

To delete the naïve key we created above:

``` r
key_delete("diary-entry-1")
```

And, for even more paranoia and tracelessness, delete your entire keyring:

``` r
keyring_delete("vault")
```

This will prompt you if the keyring is not empty, so in a scripted situation, you would want to delete all keys prior to deleting the empty keyring.

# Summary

Never ever fall to the temptation of hardcoding a password, anywhere.
It almost inevitably will cause you trouble later on.

The story above captures my own musings with the great `keyring` package for R.
I sincerely hope that it has made your code safer.
I certainly would have loved to know about all those things back then when puberty hit me.

# TL;DR

For the young and impatient, here are all the tricks from above in one code block.

``` r
library("keyring")
library("getPass")


keyring_create <- function(...) {
  suppressWarnings(
    keyring::keyring_create(..., password = "")
  )
}

# reduce the chance of accidental printout of a key 
key_get <- function(...) invisible(keyring::key_get(...))

# setting keys in a scripted environment
# takes the arguments `service`, `username` and `keyring`
key_set <- function(...) {
  # check whether this is executed in interactive mode
  if (interactive()) {
    keyring::key_set(...)
  } else {
    # when run as a script, getPass will wait for user input
    keyring::key_set_with_value(
      ...,
      password = getPass::getPass("Please enter your secret:")
    )
  }
}


# unlock a keyring, and schedule locking for when the R session ends
keyring_unlock <- function(keyring = NULL, ...) {

  # unlock the keyring
  keyring::keyring_unlock(keyring = keyring, ...)
  
  # plan a procedure to lock it when the R session ends
  # https://stackoverflow.com/a/41179916
  reg.finalizer(
    .GlobalEnv,
    function(e) {
      keyring::keyring_lock(keyring = keyring)
      message(glue::glue("Keyring `{keyring}` locked."))
    },
    onexit = TRUE # I wonder whether you could also set a timer...
  )

  return(invisible(NULL))
}
```

-   Never hard-code or store plain text secrets.
-   Always create a custom keyring.
-   Lock your keyring from within each process which uses it.
-   Inspect and clean up you keyrings regularly.
-   R I/O-functions can behave differently in `interactive()` mode.

*Stay safe, everyone!*

[^1]: This `username` itself is subject to secrecy, in a sense that you might increase security in certain situations by not hardcoding it (you could ask the user "which secret would you like to retrieve", with another `getPass`, stay tuned to see how that works).

[^2]: Note that scripted `key_set` is probably not in the intention of the creators of `keyring`, relying on system keyring persistence across sessions; yet I for my part prefer to delete all secrets from memory and clean up each time a process has finished.

Commit message:

r_keyring: warning to keep Login keyring

content/tutorials/r_keyring/index.md, after:

---
title: "The `keyring` package: We can do better than `*******`."
description: "Using your system keyring for storing and accessing secrets from within R via the `keyring` package"
date: "2025-09-05"
authors: [falkmielke]
categories: ["development", "r"]
tags: ["secrets", "keyring", "passwords", "credentials", "r", "scripting"]
number-sections: true
link-citations: true
params:
  math: true
format:
  hugo-md:
    toc: false
    preserve_yaml: true
    html-math-method: katex
---

What do the software "giants" Cisco, Ivanti, and Atlassian all have in common?
They all (repeatedly) raised negative attention in the past by [pushing hardcoded, unencrypted credentials to the public](https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/search/?q=hardcoded+credentials).

This brief tutorial will help you to not be the poor intern who is rightfully expelled for such a fatal beginners' mistake.

The programming environment we will use is R.
The package of choice is [`keyring`](https://keyring.r-lib.org/index.html), but it will be spiced up with some extra precautions.

# How it Works: the Diary

Imagine that you are age fourteen again, sitting in your room in the evening and reflecting the day, still aroused by that encounter at school with that attractive same-aged conspecific who subtly expressed interest in you after lunchbreak.
*First love is tough.*

No way you would tell anyone about this: your friends would lay on the floor giggling as is habit at the age; and of course not your parents (how embarassing would that be).
It is all new, emotions are going rampage -
best time to keep them private.

But to sort these secret new emotions, it would be good to put them to paper.
**Let us see what options you have to store our secret thoughts.**

1\. You could just write them on a *plain paper* on your desk.

Good that they are sorted.
Bad that anyone can read them: mum, pa, and that annoying little brother.

This is what we call *"hardcoded, unencrypted"* storage, and it is precicely what needs to be avoided.

2\. You can write them in a *diary with a lock*.

Better.
Yet if someone has the key, or can xray-view the text in the diary, your secrets are still exposed.

3\. You can write in a secret language (*encryption*), in a locked diary.

It turns out that your computer already has such a diary place, a safe space where it can store secrets and credentials.
It is called the **"system keyring"**.
The system keyring lives on your [operating system](https://keyring.r-lib.org/index.html), and can be used to temporarily or permanently store any secrets in working memory.

Storing secrets in RAM is like the plain paper option above, so smart computer engineers also gave us the lock and the secret language.

And here is where it gets useful:
you can manage the keyring from within *R*, to automate secrecy in your scripts.
Guess what: the package is called `keyring`.

``` r
library("keyring")
library("getPass") # for some additional tweaks, see below.
```

Some further constraints:

-   You do not want to get caught/observed writing your secrets, prior to encryption, which is why we will also use `getPass` in some situations.
-   Just like a diary, your secrets can potentially get lost in any of the options above, they are more or less volatile / persistent. Keep that in mind, and don't complain to me if you loose one.

# The Naïve Keyring Failure

## Simple Usage

The `keyring` package [is simple to use](https://keyring.r-lib.org/index.html#usage), and your system keyring is normally in place.

For most common use, you might want to get away with

``` r
keyring::key_set("diary-entry-1")
keyring::key_get("diary-entry-1")
```

And, admitted, I used keyring like so for quite a while now.
However, then I noticed a serious problem, which is there by design:

{{% callout note %}}

-   The default keyring is not password-locked: it gets unlocked at user login.
-   The system secrets persist across R sessions, potentially even across reboots.

{{% /callout %}}

This is an unfortunate combination: it means that if you used `key_set`, and entered your password, you are in a worse situation than before.
You just created a diary without a lock and left it on your desk, so that everyone who likes can just enter your room and read that good-looking Mickey gave you a compliment about your new braces :blush:.

In computer terms: anyone who comes to your computer can access the recent passwords in a new R session with `key_get`.
If I am not mistaken, passwords in some keyrings even persist reboots, yet I did not test.

What a lousy vault.
Laxity killed secrecy.

## Creating a Custom Keyring

Lesson learned: you **always** want to create a custom keyring.
And this is actually what the authors of `keyring` correctly explain [in the "Usage" section](https://keyring.r-lib.org/index.html#usage).

``` r
keyring_create(keyring = "vault")
```

On my computer, in a fresh R terminal, this single command initiated three things which happen in a row.

... i. Asks the user for a password on the terminal.

... ii. Opens a (very neat) popup window which asks for password and confirmation, indicating password strength.

... iii. Issues a warning that `Password ignored, will be read interactively`.

This might be confusing, and three passwords seem one too much.
I guess this is historic burden, or compatibility for headless systems, and found that in my workflow I can safely get rid of points (i) and (iii) by instead using the following:

``` r
suppressWarnings(keyring_create(keyring = "vault", password = ""))
```

The first password is given as empty string, and thus not prompted, and the ignorant warning message gets suppressed.

It is possible to wrap this in a function and shadow the package function:

``` r
keyring_create <- function(...) {
  suppressWarnings(
    keyring::keyring_create(..., password = "")
  )
}
```

Here you go, a personal keyring which we can use to store secrets.
It is locked and unlocked with a master password, and any secrets stored inside will be encrypted.
Keep in mind that your keyring will not lock automatically and will survive a reboot, unless you delete it.

More on all that, below.

# Managing Keys

## Stowing Secrets

Now that we have a place to stow our secrets, let's use it.

``` r
key_set(
  service = "diary",
  username = "mickey",
  keyring = "vault"
)
```

Note that the function takes a `service`, which I think of as a sort of category within a `keyring`.
Turns out that I can use my vault to store different kind of things: passwords, money, photos of ex girlfriends...
Here, I named it `diary`, for the sake of analogy.

Then, there is the `username`, which makes sense in a service created for storing username-password credentials.
You ask the "diary"-service of your "vault"-keyring for the password of/to "mickey".
Generally, think of it as a label, or a secret phrase[^1] which you provide to your vault when you want to retrieve your secret...

## Recovering Secrets

### Naïve Getting

And that would work like so:

``` r
key_get("diary", "mickey", keyring = "vault")
```

    [1] "I love Python!"

Wait...

OMG...

Why did my R console just print that top secret passphrase I entered earlier?!

### Invisible Getting

You might consider using `invisible(key_get(...))`, or even generally:

``` r
key_get <- function(...) invisible(keyring::key_get(...))
```

*Welcome to next level paranoia.*

However, this indicates what I think `keyring` is actually made for:
you actually want to assign your secrets to some variable, temporarily and on-the-fly, as in

``` r
database_connection <- DBI::dbConnect(
  RPostgres::Postgres(),
  dbname = "my_database",
  host = "localhost",
  port = 5439,
  user = "mickey",
  password = key_get("diary", "mickey", keyring = "vault") 
) # just an example...
```

### Scripted Getting: Interactive Pitfalls

Conclusion:

{{% callout note %}}

The main use case of `keyring` are scripts and code chains which repeatedly use secrets (because, if it was not repeatedly, `getPass` would be fine).
In these situations, `keyring` helps you to avoid te worse options of (a) hardcoding your secrets or (b) having to type them over and over again.

{{% /callout %}}

However, that did not quite work out for me.
The reason lies in the distinction between R's `interactive()` and non-interactive execution mode for using `key_set`.

What does *(non-)interactive* mean?

Say you have an automated process: a script which will write all the secret events of the day into your diary.
Or a script which performs data processes on an SQL database.
The script is called `secrecy_processing.R`, contains a call to `key_set`, and is run prior to executing other scripts.

The working of `key_set(...)` in there depends on whether you run the code inside that script from a system terminal, like in `Rscript secrecy_processing.R`, or from the R console or another script, e.g. `source('secrecy_processing.R')`.
The second situation, *interactive mode*, is equivalend to what RStudio does, and works conveniently for most users.

Yet in case you have an automated `isFALSE(interactive())` process, one that you run from a terminal or via a `cronjob` (exactly where `keyring` shines), `key_set` fails because it takes continuous input: it will just use the next line that it receives and think it is the password.

This is a weird quirk[^2] which has caused me some headache, but at least I [learned about R's `interactive` mode](https://stackoverflow.com/a/27114322) on the way.

Here is the workaround: `keyring` brings a function to `key_set_with_value` with a password argument, which can be customized.

``` r
# takes the arguments `service`, `username` and `keyring`
key_set <- function(...) {
  # check whether this is executed in interactive mode
  if (interactive()) {
    keyring::key_set(...)
  } else {
    # when run as a script, getPass will wait for user input
    keyring::key_set_with_value(
      ...,
      password = getPass::getPass("Please enter your secret:")
    )
  }
}

# example usage
key_set(
  service = "diary",
  username = "mickey",
  keyring = "vault"
)

# print(key_get("diary", "mickey", keyring = "vault"))
```

This could be solved with `readLines("stdin", n = 1)`, yet then the user input is visible in plain text during typing.
The next best terminal solution I found is the R library `getPass`.
You could also search for a dialog box option to enter the password, or a confirmation mechanism.

Another option would be to use [`configr`](https://github.com/Miachol/configr) and store a config file with secrets in a system vault (e.g. with ["tomb"](https://dyne.org/tomb/)).

Get creative.

### Locking and Unlocking

You might notice that, once your keyring is created, the master password is rarely asked again.
*What good is a vault for if you do not lock the door?*

At the end of your script, or even better: after finishing an operation, you might want to lock your keyring.

``` r
keyring_lock(keyring = "vault")
# keyring_unlock(keyring = "vault")
```

This is critical:
Because you work on the **system keyring**, your keyring stays open even after the R sessions closed.

Normally, it should be locked upon reboot.
However, it is good practice to "consciously" lock your keyrings whenever you procedure using it has finished.

{{% callout note %}}

**Always** make sure that your keyring is locked when the work is finished.

{{% /callout %}}

It might be even better practice to already schedule the closing of your keyring at the moment you open it.
Just so you don't forget to leave your door open when you leave.

``` r
keyring_unlock <- function(keyring = NULL, ...) {

  # unlock the keyring
  keyring::keyring_unlock(keyring = keyring, ...)
  
  # plan a procedure to lock it when the R session ends
  # https://stackoverflow.com/a/41179916
  reg.finalizer(
    .GlobalEnv,
    function(e) {
      keyring::keyring_lock(keyring = keyring)
      message(glue::glue("Keyring `{keyring}` locked."))
    },
    onexit = TRUE # I wonder whether you could also set a timer...
  )

  return(invisible(NULL))
}

keyring_unlock(keyring = "vault")
```

(Requires an explicit `keyring_unlock` prior to any `key_set` or `key_get` operation.)

For the Linux operating system, I assembled a function which will spawn a background process for delayed locking of the keyring:

``` r
# lock the keyring after a delay
lock_keyring_delayed <- function(keyring_label, delay = 300) {

  stopifnot("glue" = require("glue"))
  stopifnot("keyring" = require("keyring"))

  # string building blocks
  l <- glue::glue('\"{keyring_label}\"')
  k <- 'keyring::keyring_'
  x <- glue::glue('({l} %in% keyring::keyring_list()$keyring)')

  # this only works on linux
  if (isFALSE(.Platform$OS.type == "unix")) {
    message(glue::glue("
      (keyring will not lock with delay;
       invoke 'keyring::keyring_lock({l})')
    "))
    return(invisible(NULL))
  }

  # build the core script
  cmd <- glue::glue(
    "Rscript -e 'if ({x} && isFALSE({k}is_locked({l}))) {k}lock({l})'"
    #  && echo 'slam!' # <- for testing
  )

  # background-execute the script with a delay
  system(glue::glue("sleep {delay} && {cmd} &", wait = FALSE))

} # /lock_keyring_delayed
```

However, that still leaves the keyring on the system.

# Cleanup

## Cleanup Command

After using all this for a while, you might begin to hear a sort of metallic rattling noise whenever you start moving.
These are all the keys on your dear old `keyring` which you are bringing along but forgot about.

``` r
key_list()
key_list(keyring = "vault")
```

To delete the naïve key we created above:

``` r
key_delete("diary-entry-1")
```

And, for even more paranoia and tracelessness, delete your entire keyring:

``` r
keyring_delete("vault")
```

This will prompt you if the keyring is not empty, so in a scripted situation, you would want to delete all keys prior to deleting the empty keyring.

## Cleanup System Keyring (Warning!)

As I experienced, cleanup can go to far.
After finishing this write-up, I cleaned up all the keyrings which had accumulated over time from mis-use of R's `keyring`.
This reminded me that what I demonstrated herein is working on the **host system**, and has implications which go beyond R.

What went wrong?
There was a keyring I could not place, called `Login`.

I learned the hard way that the `Login` keyring is a system requirement, and deleting is will cause system issues.
What followed was a desparate, but ultimately succesful attempt to repair arch linux by force-removing the `keyutils` package (which immediately broke the system even more[^3], the package manager depends on it), and then re-install it via sideloading from a live-usb-system.

Long story short:
**your system keyring is vital**.
Keep it in order.

# Summary

Never ever fall to the temptation of hardcoding a password, anywhere.
It almost inevitably will cause you trouble later on.

The story above captures my own musings with the great `keyring` package for R.
I sincerely hope that it has made your code safer.
I certainly would have loved to know about all those things back then when puberty hit me.

# TL;DR

For the young and impatient, here are all the tricks from above in one code block.

``` r
library("keyring")
library("getPass")


keyring_create <- function(...) {
  suppressWarnings(
    keyring::keyring_create(..., password = "")
  )
}

# reduce the chance of accidental printout of a key 
key_get <- function(...) invisible(keyring::key_get(...))

# setting keys in a scripted environment
# takes the arguments `service`, `username` and `keyring`
key_set <- function(...) {
  # check whether this is executed in interactive mode
  if (interactive()) {
    keyring::key_set(...)
  } else {
    # when run as a script, getPass will wait for user input
    keyring::key_set_with_value(
      ...,
      password = getPass::getPass("Please enter your secret:")
    )
  }
}


# unlock a keyring, and schedule locking for when the R session ends
keyring_unlock <- function(keyring = NULL, ...) {

  # unlock the keyring
  keyring::keyring_unlock(keyring = keyring, ...)
  
  # plan a procedure to lock it when the R session ends
  # https://stackoverflow.com/a/41179916
  reg.finalizer(
    .GlobalEnv,
    function(e) {
      keyring::keyring_lock(keyring = keyring)
      message(glue::glue("Keyring `{keyring}` locked."))
    },
    onexit = TRUE # I wonder whether you could also set a timer...
  )

  return(invisible(NULL))
}
```

-   Never hard-code or store plain text secrets.
-   Always create a custom keyring.
-   Lock your keyring from within each process which uses it.
-   Inspect and clean up you keyrings regularly.
-   R I/O-functions can behave differently in `interactive()` mode.
-   Do not wipe your system keyring, it is an integral component.

*Stay safe, everyone!*

[^1]: This `username` itself is subject to secrecy, in a sense that you might increase security in certain situations by not hardcoding it (you could ask the user "which secret would you like to retrieve", with another `getPass`, stay tuned to see how that works).

[^2]: Note that scripted `key_set` is probably not in the intention of the creators of `keyring`, relying on system keyring persistence across sessions; yet I for my part prefer to delete all secrets from memory and clean up each time a process has finished.

[^3]: A brick with windows on it, to be exact.
